

  
 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
  
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF GHANA 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE 
CURRICULUM FOR PRIMARY SCHOOLS 
(BASIC 4 - 6) 
SEPTEMBER 2019 
 
 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
ii 
 
 
English Language Curriculum for Primary Schools 
 
 
 
 
Enquiries and comments on this Curriculum should be addressed to: 
The Executive Secretary 
National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NaCCA) 
Ministry of Education 
P. O. Box CT PM 77 
Cantonments 
Accra 
Telephone: 0302909071, 0302909862 
Email:        info@nacca.gov.gh  
Website:   www.nacca.gov.gh  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
       
 
 
 
 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
iii 
FOREWORD 
The new curriculum for Ghana’s primary schools is standards-based,  which  is  our  demonstration  of  placing  learning  at  the  heart  of  every  classroom  and 
ensuring that every learner receives quality education. Provision of accessible quality education for all is non-negotiable if we are to meet the human capital 
needs of our country, required for accelerated sustainable national development. It is for this reason that the new curriculum sets out clearly the learning areas 
that need to be taught, how they should be taught and how they should be assessed. It provides a set of core competencies and standards that learners are to 
know, understand and demonstrate as they progress through the curriculum from one content standard to the other and from one phase to the next. The 
curriculum and its related teachers’ manual promote the use of inclusive and gender responsive pedagogy within the context of learning-centred  teaching 
methods  so  that  every  learner  can  participate  in  every  learning  process  and  enjoy  learning.  The  curriculum  encourages  the  use  of  Information  and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs) for teaching and learning – ICTs as teaching and learning materials. 
 
The new curriculum has at its heart the acquisition of skills in the 4Rs of Reading, wRiting, aRithmetic and cReativity by all learners. It is expected that at any 
point of exit from a formal education, all learners should be equipped with these foundational skills for life, which are also prerequisites for Ghana becoming a 
learning  nation.  The  graduates  from  the  school  system  should  become  functional  citizens  in  the  4Rs  and  lifelong  learners.  They  should  be  digital  literates, 
critical thinkers and problem solvers. The education they receive through the study of the learning areas in the curriculum should enable them to collaborate 
and communicate well with others and be innovative. The graduates from Ghana’s schools should be leaders with a high sense of national and global identity. 
The curriculum therefore provides a good opportunity in its design to develop individuals with the right skills and attitudes to lead the transformation of Ghana 
into an industrialised learning nation.  
 
For  this  reason,  the  Ministry  of  Education  expects  that  learners,  as  a  result  of  the  new  knowledge,  skills  and  values  they  have  acquired  through  the  new 
curriculum,  will  show  a  new  sense  of  identity  as  creative,  honest  and  responsible  citizens.  These  are  our  core  values  that  underpin  the  identification  and 
selection  of  the  learning  areas  for  this  curriculum.    These  core  values  serve  as  fundamental  building  blocks  for  developing  into  our  learners  the  spirit  of 
teamwork, respect, resilience and the commitment to achieving excellence.  The Ministry endorses a quality learning experience as an entitlement for each of 
Ghana’s school-going girl and boy; the curriculum has rightly focused on learning and learning progression. The Ministry has also endorsed accountability as a 
critical domain for effective workings of standards-based curriculum. 
 
More importantly the role of the teacher is to make this curriculum work for the intended purpose - to inculcate in learners the core competencies and values 
and to make learning happen; improve learning outcomes – and the support that teachers need is duly recognised and endorsed by my Ministry. The Ministry 
will support the implementation of the curriculum to include capacity development of all teachers in the new curriculum. Teachers matter in the development 
and delivery of the standards-based curriculum and we will continue to support our teachers on this journey that we have started together to put learning at 
the centre of what we do best; teach! 
 
I thank all those who have contributed their time and expertise to the development of this curriculum for primary schools in Ghana. 
 
 
Dr. Matthew Opoku Prempeh (MP) 
The Honourable Minister of Education 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
iv 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
FOREWORD Error! 
Bookmark not defined. 
RATIONALE FOR PRIMARY ENGLISH LANGUAGE vi 
PHILOSOPHY vi 
GENERAL AIMS vii 
CORE COMPETENCIES viii 
VALUES xiii 
ORGANISATION OF THE CURRICULUM xix 
SCOPE AND SEQUENCE xxv 
BASIC 4 2 
STRAND 1: ORAL LANGUAGE 2 
STRAND 2: READING 17 
STRAND 3: GRAMMAR USAGE AT WORD AND PHRASE LEVELS 33 
STRAND 4: WRITING 47 
STRAND 5: USING WRITING CONVENTIONS/ GRAMMAR USAGE 58 
STRAND 6: EXTENSIVE READING 69 
BASIC 5 71 
STRAND 1: ORAL LANGUAGE 71 
STRAND 2: READING 91 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
v 
STRAND 3: GRAMMAR AND USAGE AT WORD AND PHRASE LEVELS 105 
STRAND 4: WRITING 120 
STRAND 5: USING WRITING CONVENTIONS/GRAMMAR USAGE 138 
STRAND 6: EXTENSIVE READING 150 
BASIC 6 152 
STRAND 1: ORAL LANGUAGE 152 
STRAND 2: READING 169 
STRAND 3: GRAMMAR USAGE AT WORD AND PHRASE LEVELS 181 
STRAND 4: WRITING 197 
STRAND 5: USING WRITING CONVENTIONS/ GRAMMAR USAGE 210 
STRAND 6: EXTENSIVE READING 221 
 ENGLISH LANGUAGE SUBJECT PANEL MEMBERS AND REVIEWERS 221 
 
 
 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
vi 
RATIONALE FOR PRIMARY ENGLISH LANGUAGE  
Language  is  both  a  medium  of  communication  and  a  library  in  which  the  elements  of  culture  are  stored.  It  remains  the  most  reliable  means 
through which the elements one’s culture and that of other people are transmitted from generation to generation. First, the study of English as a 
second Language will equip learners with effective communication skills that will provide them with an appreciation of the values embodied in 
the  language  and  culture  of  others.  In  the  light  of  present  day  global  development  and  technological  advancement,  the  learning  of  a  second 
language and the acquisition of literacy must promote the respect for the language and culture of others. 
Secondly, the special status of English as a language across curriculum and as the official language of Ghana and the role it plays in national life 
including  being  the  language  of  government  business  and  administration,  commerce  as  well  as the  media,  makes  it  important  that  Ghanaian 
children learn English as a second language.  
Also, to enable our learners become  members of the  international community, they must be exposed to English,  the  most widely used global 
language. This means that success in education at all levels depends, to a very large extent, on the individual’s proficiency in the English language. 
However, children must first be given a strong foundation in their first language to make the learning of English easier for them as confirmed by 
research.  It is for these and other reasons that English Language is a major subject of study in Ghanaian schools. 
PHILOSOPHY 
Borrowing  from  a  variety  of  philosophical  ideas  like  the  interactionists  and  contextualists, this  language  and  literacy  learning  curriculum  is 
informed by two major ideas, namely the Developmental theory and the Social Constructivism. 
Children go through developmental stages as they learn language and research is clear that children develop language at their own pace as they 
interact  with  the  social  environment  around  them.  Therefore,  when  children  are  provided  with  a  good  social  environment,  they develop 
language faster than children who are in non-interactive and poor language environment.  
In teaching language and literacy, the syllabus adopts the socio-constructivist dimensions to learning. At school, literacy learning goes through the 
same  developmental  processes.  Children  have  in-built  potentials  to  develop  and  acquire  new  language  while  approximating  grammatical 
structures as they learn to speak. They invent names for the objects in their world, from the beginning but gradually, as they interact, they learn 
the appropriate language of the community.  
The social constructivist theory holds the notion that reading and writing are an active process of constructing meaning from print; hence, the 
use of their favourite phrase “meaning making” to describe how active the reader is in learning language and literacy and comprehending what 
s/he reads or hears. The teacher guides learners to decode text and supports them to engage and make sense of the texts they read. This is to 
ensure that good readers do not just take in a store of given information but make their own interpretation of experiences to elaborate and test 
those interpretations. 
Thus,  participatory  and  thematic approaches should  be  emphasised  to  help  children  connect  literacy  learning  in  the  classroom  to  solving  real 
world problems in their environment and world around them. The teacher should promote interaction and make learners active in their own 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
vii 
learning. Learners’ differences in the language classroom should not be taken as a deficit, but provide the teacher with the background  to 
support children. Current definitions emphasise that literacy is not just reading and writing but also listening, speaking and thinking. It involves 
the knowledge and skills to engage in social and academic processes needed for effective functioning in the school and community. 
GENERAL AIMS 
The general aim of the language and literacy curriculum is to enable learners develop an appreciation and understanding of the English language 
and to use it effectively, making meaning with it in ways that are purposeful, imaginative, creative and critical. 
SPECIFIC AIMS 
The  overriding aim for the Language  and Literacy curriculum (in both Ghanaian  Language and English  language) in  basic schools is  to promote 
high standards of language and literacy by equipping pupils with a good command of the spoken and written word to enable them to: 
acquire the basic skills that will help them decode any text. 
read age-level texts easily, fluently and with comprehension. 
cultivate the habit of reading widely for pleasure and information. 
acquire a wide stock of vocabulary and understanding grammatical structures as well as linguistic conventions for easy reading, good writing and 
speaking. 
write clearly, accurately and coherently, adapting their first language style in a range of contexts for varied purposes and audience. 
read with pleasure literary materials and appreciate a great stock of literary repertoire. 
acquire the skill of self-expression and be able to communicate their ideas to different audiences to achieve the intended purpose. 
develop and cultivate the skill and ability to read the lines, in-between the lines and beyond the lines; and to find out hidden meaning and ideas. 
 
TEACHING AND LEARNING EXPECTATIONS 
Teachers are expected to: 
1. guide and facilitate learning by generating discourse among learners and challenging them to accept and share responsibility for their own 
learning, based on their unique individual differences;  
2. select English Language content, adapt and plan lessons to meet the interests, knowledge, understanding, abilities and experiences of 
learners; 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
viii 
3. work together as colleagues within and across disciplines and grade levels to develop communities of English Language learners who 
exhibit good communication skills and positive attitudes towards the learning of English Language. 
4. use multiple methods to systematically gather data about learners' understanding and ability in order to guide the teaching and learning 
of English Language, and also to provide feedback to both learners and parents;  
5. design and manage learning environments that provide learners with the time, space and resources needed for learning English Language. 
 
CORE COMPETENCIES 
In using this curriculum, we hope that certain core competencies will be developed in learners to help them develop our country, Ghana. These 
competencies include: 
1. Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving (CP) 
This  skill  enables  learners  to  develop  their  cognitive  and  reasoning  abilities  to  analyse  issues  and  situations  leading  to  the  resolution  of 
problems. Critical thinking and problem-solving skills enable learners to draw on and demonstrate what they have learned from their own 
experiences to analyse situations and choose the most appropriate out of a number of possible solutions. It requires that learners embrace 
the problem at hand, persevere and take responsibility for their own learning. 
2. Creativity and Innovation (CI) 
This  competence  promotes  in  learners  entrepreneurial  skills  through  their  ability  to  think  of  new  ways  of  solving  problems  and 
developing  technologies  for  addressing  the  problem  at  hand.  It  requires  ingenuity  of  ideas,  arts,  technology  and enterprise.  Learners 
having this competency can think independently and creatively as well. 
3. Communication and Collaboration (CC) 
This competence promotes in learners the skills to make use of languages, symbols and texts to exchange information about themselves 
and their life experiences. Learners actively participate in sharing their ideas, engage in dialogue with others by listening to and learning 
from others in ways that respect and value the multiple perspectives of all persons involved. 
4. Cultural Identity and Global Citizenship (CG) 
This involves developing learners to put country and service foremost through an understanding of what it means to be active citizens. 
This  is  done  by  inculcating  in  them  a  strong  sense  of  social  and  economic  awareness.  Learners  make  use  of  the  knowledge,  skills, 
competencies and attitudes acquired to contribute effectively towards the socio-economic development of the country and on the global 
stage.  Learners  build  skills  to  critically  identify  and  analyse  cultural  and  global  trends  that  enable  them  to  contribute  to  the  global 
community. 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
ix 
5. Personal Development and Leadership (PL) 
PL involves improving self-awareness, self-knowledge, skills, health, building and renewing self-esteem; identifying and developing talents, 
fulfilling dreams and aspirations and developing other people or meeting other people’s needs. It involves recognising the importance of 
values such  as honesty and empathy;  seeking the well-being of others; distinguishing between right and wrong;  fostering perseverance, 
resilience and self-confidence; exploring leadership, self-regulation and responsibility, and developing a love for lifelong learning. 
6. Digital literacy (DL) 
DL  involves  developing  learners  to  discover,  acquire  and  communicate  through  ICT  to  support their  learning  and  make  use  of  digital 
media responsibly. 
LEARNING DOMAINS (EXPECTED LEARNING BEHAVIOURS) 
A  central  aspect  of  this  curriculum  is  the  concept  of  three  integral  learning  domains  that  should  be  the  basis  for  instruction  and  assessment. 
These are: 
-  Knowledge, Understanding and Application 
-  Language Skills 
-  Attitudes and Values 
 
Knowledge, Understanding and Application  
Under  this  domain,  learners  acquire  knowledge  through  some  learning  experiences.  They  may  also  show  understanding  of  concepts  by 
comparing,  summarising,  re-writing,  etc.  in  their  own  words  and  constructing  meaning  from  instruction.  The  learner  may  also  apply  the 
knowledge acquired in some new contexts. At a higher level of learning behaviour, the learner may be required to analyse an issue or a problem. 
At a much more higher level, the learner may be required to synthesize knowledge by integrating a number of ideas to formulate a plan, solve a 
problem, compose a story, or a piece of music. Further, the learners may be required to evaluate, estimate and interpret a concept. At the last 
level,  which  is  the  highest,  learners  may  be  required  to  create,  invent,  compose,  design  and  construct.  These  learning  behaviours  namely, 
“knowing”, “understanding”, “applying”, “analysing”, “synthesising”, “evaluating” and “creating” fall under the domain “Knowledge, Understanding 
and Application”.  
In this curriculum, learning indicators are stated with action verbs to show what the learner should know and be able to do. For example, the 
learner will be able to describe something. Being able to “describe” something after teaching and learning has been completed means that the 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
x 
learner has acquired “knowledge”. Being able to explain, summarise and give examples etc. means that the learner has understood the concept 
taught. 
Similarly, being able to develop, defend, etc. means that the learner can “apply” the knowledge acquired in some new context.You will note that 
each of the indicators in the curriculum contains an “action verb” that describes the behaviour  the  learner  will  be  able  to  demonstrate  after 
teaching and learning has taken place. “Knowledge, Understanding and Application” is a domain that should be the prime focus of teaching and 
learning  in  schools.  Teaching,  in  most  cases,  tends  to  stress  knowledge  acquisition  to  the  detriment  of  other  higher-level  behaviours  such  as 
applying knowledge.   
Each action verb in any indicator outlines the underlying expected outcome. Each indicator must be read carefully to know the learning domain 
towards which the teacher has to teach. The focus is to move teaching and learning from the didactic acquisition of “knowledge” where there is 
fact memorisation, heavy reliance on formulae, remembering facts without critiquing them or relating them to real world – surface learning – 
to a new position called – deep learning. Learners are expected to deepen their learning by knowledge application to develop critical thinking 
skills  and  to  generate  creative  ideas  to  solve  real  life  problems  in  their  school  lives  and  later,  in  their  adult  lives.  This  is  the  position  where 
learning becomes beneficial to the learner.   
 
The explanation and the key words involved in the “Knowledge, Understanding and Application” domain are as follows: 
Knowing: This is the ability to remember, recall, identify, define, describe, list, name, match, state principles, facts and concepts. 
Knowledge is the ability to remember or recall concepts already learnt and this constitutes the lowest level of learning. 
Understanding: This is the ability to explain, summarise, translate, rewrite, paraphrase, give examples, generalise, estimate    
  or predict consequences based on a trend. Understanding is generally the ability to grasp the meaning of  
  some concepts that may be verbal, pictorial, or symbolic. 
 
Applying: This dimension is also referred to as “Use of Knowledge”. It is the ability to use knowledge or apply knowledge, apply 
rules, methods, principles, theories, etc. to situations that are new and unfamiliar. It also involves the ability to produce, 
solve, plan, demonstrate, discover, etc.  
Analysing:  This is  the  ability to break  down concepts/information  into  its component parts; to  differentiate, compare, distinguish, 
outline, separate, identify significant points, etc., ability to recognise unstated assumptions and logical fallacies; ability to 
recognise inferences from facts, etc.  
Synthesising: This is the ability to put parts or ideas together to form a new whole.  It involves the ability to combine,  
  compile, compose, devise, plan, revise, organise, create and generate new ideas and solutions. 
 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xi 
Evaluating: This is the ability to appraise, compare features of different things and make comments or judgment, contrast, criticise, 
justify,  support,  discuss,  conclude,  make  recommendations  etc.    Evaluation  refers  to  the  ability  to  judge  the  worth  or 
value of some concepts based on some criteria. 
Creating: This is the ability to use information or materials to plan, compose, produce, manufacture or construct products. From 
the  foregoing, creating is the highest form  of thinking and  learning and  is,  therefore, a  very important  behaviour. This, 
unfortunately, is the area where most learners perform poorly. In order to get learners to develop critical thinking skills, 
beginning  right  from  the  lower  primary  level,  it  is  advised  that  teachers    do  their  best  to  help  their  learners    develop 
analytic skills as  has been said already. 
 
Language Skills 
There are four main language skills to develop in learners at the primary level. These are: 
o Listening 
o Reading 
o Speaking  
o Writing  
Explanation of the meaning of the four skills is as follows: 
 Listening 
 This  is  the  ability  to  accurately  receive  and  interpret  messages  in  the  communication  process.  For  example,  the  ability  to  listen  to, 
understand and follow directions, instructions, etc. given in a language. 
 Reading  
This is the ability to read and understand what is conveyed in a piece of writing. The reader must be able to read coherently and must 
be able to answer questions arising from the passage read.  He/she should also be able to summarise passages read in his/her own words 
to show understanding of the passages. 
 
 Speaking 
This is the ability to speak a language clearly and in a way that will be understood by listeners.  This is an oral communication skill that 
learners should be encouraged to practise to perfection. 
 
 Writing:   

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xii 
This is the ability to express one’s self clearly and comprehensively in writing. Writing may be in the form of simple sentences,  short  essays, 
compositions, summaries, letters, etc. 
Learning the English Language implies the acquisition of two major abilities or behaviours. These are “Knowledge and Understanding” and the 
“Use of Knowledge”. “Knowledge and Understanding” refers to the ability to identify and recall, for example, the principles of grammar acquired 
through instruction and further acquired through Listening and Reading.  “Use of Knowledge” implies the ability to use the language in writing 
and in speaking. Beside the two dimensions are the four skills, Listening, Reading, Speaking and Writing. Listening and Reading are referred to as 
“Receptive Skills.” They are the skills through which a learner receives communication. Speaking and Writing are referred to as “Productive 
Skills” since these are the skills which require the learner  to  produce  knowledge  acquired  through  speaking  the  language  and  through  writing 
letters, compositions, etc. 
 
ATTITUDES AND VALUES 
To be effective, competent and reflective citizens who will be willing and capable of solving personal and societal problems, learners should be 
exposed  to  situations  that  challenge  them  to  raise  questions  and  attempt  to  solve  problems.  Learners,  therefore,  need  to  acquire  positive 
attitudes, values and psychosocial skills that will enable them to participate in debates and take a stand on issues affecting them and others.  
Attitudes 
i. Curiosity: 
It is an inclination or a feeling towards seeking information about how things work in a variety of fields. 
ii. Perseverance: 
This is the ability to pursue a problem until a satisfying solution is found. 
iii. Flexibility in ideas: 
It is the willingness to change an opinion in the face of more plausible evidence. 
iv. Respect for Evidence: 
It is the willingness to collect and use data in one’s investigation and also have respect for data collected by others. 
v. Reflection: 
This is the habit of critically reviewing ways in which an investigation has been carried out to see possible faults and other ways by which 
the investigation could be improved upon.  

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xiii 
 
Values 
 
At the heart of the curriculum is the belief in nurturing honest, creative and responsible citizens. As such, every part of this curriculum, including 
the related pedagogy should be consistent with the following set of values: 
Respect: This  includes  respect  for  the  nation  of  Ghana,  its  institutions  and  laws  and  the  culture  and  respect  among  its  citizens  and 
friends of Ghana. 
Diversity: Ghana is a multicultural society in which every citizen enjoys fundamental rights and responsibilities. Learners must be taught 
to respect the views of all persons and to see national diversity as a powerful force for nation development. The curriculum promotes 
social cohesion.  
Equity: The socio-economic development across the country is uneven. Consequently, it is necessary to ensure an equitable distribution 
of  resources based on the unique needs of learners and schools. Ghana’s learners are from diverse backgrounds, which require the 
provision of equal opportunities for all, and that all should strive to care for one another other, both personally and professionally. 
Commitment  to  achieving  excellence: Ghana’s learners must be taught to appreciate the opportunities provided through the 
curriculum  and  persist  in  doing  their  best  in  whatever  field  of  endeavour  as  global  citizens.  The  curriculum  encourages  innovativeness 
through  creative  and  critical  thinking  and  the  use  of  contemporary  technology.  Ghana,  thus,  will  instil  the  value  of  excellent  service 
above the self. 
Teamwork/Collaboration: Ghana’s  schools  are  to  be  dedicated  to  a  constructive  and  team-oriented  working  and  learning 
environment. This also means that learners should live peacefully with all persons with an attitude of tolerance and collaboration. 
Truth and Integrity: The curriculum aims to develop Ghana’s learners into individuals who will consistently tell the truth, irrespective 
of the consequences, be morally upright with the attitude of doing the right thing, even when no one is watching, be true to themselves 
and lawful beliefs, and be willing to live the values of honesty and compassion. Equally important, the ethos of the workplace, including 
integrity and grit, must underpin the learning processes to allow students to see and apply academic skills and competencies in the world 
of work.  

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xiv 
 
 
ASSESSMENT 
Assessment is a process  of collecting  and evaluating information about learners and using  the  information  to make  decisions to improve their 
learning. 
 
In this curriculum, it is suggested that assessment is used to promote learning. Its purpose is to identify the strengths and weaknesses of learners 
to enable teachers ascertain their learners' response to instruction.  
 
Assessment is both formative and summative. Formative assessment is viewed in terms of Assessment as learning and Assessment for learning.  
 
Assessment as learning:  Assessment  as  learning  relates  to  engaging  learners  to  reflect  on  the  expectations  of  their  learning.  Information  that 
learners  provide  the  teacher  forms  the  basis  for  refining  teaching-learning  strategies.  Learners  are  assisted  to  play  their  roles  and  to  take 
responsibility for their own learning to improve performance. Learners set their own goals and monitor their progress.  
 
Assessment for learning:  It is an approach used to monitor learners' progress and achievement. This occurs throughout the learning process. 
The teacher employs assessment for learning to seek and interpret evidence, which serves as timely feedback to refine their teaching strategies 
and improve learners’ performance. Learners become actively involved in the learning process and gain confidence in what they are expected to 
learn.   
 
Assessment of learning:  This  is  summative  assessment.  It  describes  the  level  learners  have  attained  in  the  learning,  what  they  know  and  can  do 
over a period. The emphasis is to evaluate the learner’s cumulative progress and achievement.  
 
It  must  be  emphasised  that  all  forms  of  assessment  should  be  based  on  the  domains  of  learning.  In  developing  assessment  procedures,  one 
should try to select indicators in such a way that he/she will be able to assess a representative sample from a given strand. Each indicator in the 
curriculum  is  considered  a  criterion  to  be  achieved  by  the  learners.  When  one  develops  assessment  items  or  questions  that  are based  on  a 
representative sample of the indicators taught, the assessment is referred to as a “Criterion-Referenced Assessment”.  In many cases, a teacher 
cannot assess all the indicators taught in a term or year.  The assessment procedure one uses i.e. class assessments, homework, projects, etc. 
must be developed in such a way that the various procedures complement one another to provide a representative sample of indicators taught 
over a period. 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xv 
 
SUGGESTED TIME ALLOCATION 
 
A total of ten periods a week, each period consisting of thirty minutes, is allocated to the teaching of English Language at the Primary level. It is 
recommended that two periods of English Language be taught per day. 
PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES 
These are the approaches, methods and strategies for ensuring that every learner benefits from appropriate and relevant teaching and learning 
episodes which are timely assessed and feedback provided to the learner and other stakeholders, such as parents and education authorities. 
These approaches include the type and use of appropriate and relevant teaching and learning resources to ensure that all learners make the 
expected level of learning outcomes. The curriculum emphasises:  
a. the  creation  of  learning-centred  classrooms  through  the  use  of  creative  approaches  to  teaching  and  learning  as  strategies  to 
ensuring learner-empowerment and independent learning,  
b. the positioning of inclusion and equity at the centre of quality teaching and learning,  
c. the use of differentiation and scaffolding as teaching and learning strategies for ensuring that no learner is left behind, 
d. the use of Information Communications Technology (ICT) as a pedagogical tool, 
e. the identification of subject specific instructional expectations needed for making learning in the subject relevant to learners and 
f. the integration of assessment into the teaching and learning process and as an accountability strategy. 
Learning-Centred Pedagogy 
The  learner  is  at  the  centre  of  learning.  At  the  heart  of  the  national  curriculum  is  the  learning  progression  and  improvement of  learning 
outcomes for Ghana’s young people, with a focus on the 4Rs – Reading, wRiting, aRithmetic and cReativity. It is expected that at each curriculum 
phase, learners would be offered the essential learning experiences to progress seamlessly to the next phase. Where there are indications that a 
learner is not sufficiently ready for the next phase, a compensatory provision through differentiation should be provided to ensure that such a 
learner is ready to progress with his/her group. At the primary school level, the progression phases are B1 – B6. 
 
The curriculum encourages the creation of a learning-centred classroom, with the opportunity for learners to engage in meaningful “hands-on” 
activities  that  bring  home  to  the  learner  what  they  are  learning  in  school  and  what  they  know  from  outside  of  school.  The  learning-centred 
classroom is a place for the learners to discuss ideas and through the inspiration of the teacher, to also actively engage in looking for answers, 
working in groups to solve problems, researching for, analysing and evaluating information. The aim of the learning-centred classroom approach 
is to develop learner-autonomy so that learners can take ownership of their learning. It provides the opportunity for deep learning to take place.  
 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xvi 
The teacher should create a learning atmosphere that ensures that:  
 learners feel safe and accepted. 
 learners are given frequent opportunities to interact with varied sources of information, teaching and learning materials and ideas in 
a variety of ways. 
 teacher assumes the position of a facilitator or coach who:  
o helps learners to identify a problem suitable for investigation via project work, 
o connects the problem with the context of the learners’ world so that it presents authentic opportunities for learning, 
o organises the subject matter around the problem, not the discipline, 
o gives learners responsibility for defining their learning experience and planning to solve the problem, 
o encourages learners to collaborate in learning and  
o expects all learners to demonstrate the results of their learning through a product or performance. 
It is more productive for learners to find answers to their own questions rather than teachers providing the answers and their opinions in a 
learning-centred classroom.  

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xvii 
Inclusion 
Inclusion  is  ensuring  access  and  learning  for  all  learners,  especially,  those  disadvantaged.  All  learners  are  entitled  to  a  broad  and  balanced 
curriculum in every school in Ghana. The daily learning activities to which learners are exposed should ensure that the learners’ right to equal 
access to quality education is being met. The curriculum suggests a variety of approaches that addresses learners’ diversity and  special needs in 
the learning process, which when effectively used in lessons, will contribute to the full development of the learning potential of every learner. 
Learners have individual needs and different learning styles, learning experiences and different levels of motivation for learning. Planning, delivery 
and reflections on daily learning episodes should consider these differences. The curriculum, therefore, promotes:  
 learning that is linked to the learners’ background and to their prior experiences, interests, potential and capacities,  
 learning that is meaningful because it aligns with learners’ ability (e.g. learning that is oriented towards developing general capabilities and 
solving the practical problems of everyday life) and 
 the active involvement of the learners in the selection and organisation of learning experiences, making them aware of their importance 
and also enabling them to assess their own learning outcomes. 
Differentiation and Scaffolding 
Differentiation is  a  process  by  which  differences  between  learners  are  accommodated  so  that  all  learners  in  a  group  have  best  chances  of 
learning. It could be by task, support and outcome. Differentiation, as a way of ensuring each learner benefits adequately from the delivery of the 
curriculum, can be achieved in the classroom through:  
 task, 
 pastoral support and 
 Outcome.  
Differentiation by task involves teachers setting different tasks for learners of different abilities, e.g. in sketching the plan and shape of their 
classroom, some learners could be made to sketch with free hand, while others would be made to trace the outline of the plan. 
Differentiation by support involves the teacher referring weak students to the Guidance and Counselling Unit for academic support. 
Differentiation by outcome involves the teacher allowing students to respond at different levels. Weaker students are allowed more time for 
complicated tasks. 
 
 
 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xviii 
Scaffolding in  education  refers  to  the  use  of  a  variety  of  instructional  techniques  aimed  at  moving  students  progressively  towards  stronger 
understanding and ultimately, greater independence in the learning process.  
It also involves breaking up the learning episodes, experiences or concepts into smaller parts and then providing learners with the support they 
need to learn each part. The process may require a teacher assigning an excerpt of a longer text to learners to read, engage them to discuss the 
excerpt to improve comprehension of its rationale, and then guide them through the key words/vocabulary to ensure learners have developed a 
thorough understanding of the text before engaging them to read the full text. Common scaffolding strategies available to the teacher are:  
 give learners a simplified version of a lesson, assignment or reading and then gradually increase the complexity, difficulty or sophistication 
over time, 
 describe or illustrate a concept, problem or process in multiple ways to ensure understanding, 
 give learners an exemplar or model of an assignment they will be asked to complete, 
 give learners a vocabulary lesson before they read a difficult text, 
 clearly  describe  the  purpose  of  a  learning  activity,  the  directions  learners  need  to  follow  and  the  learning  goals  they  are  expected  to 
achieve and 
 explicitly describe how the new lesson builds on the knowledge and skills leaners were taught in a previous lesson.  
INFORMATION COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY 
ICT has been integrated into this curriculum as a teaching and learning tool to enhance deep and independent learning. Some of the expected 
outcomes that this curriculum aims to achieve through ICT use for teaching and learning are: 
 improved teaching and learning processes,  
 improved consistency and quality of teaching and learning,  
 increased opportunities for more learner-centred pedagogical approaches  
 improved inclusive education practices by addressing inequalities in gender, language, ability,  
 improved collaboration, creativity, higher order thinking skills and  
 enhanced flexibility and differentiated approach of delivery.  
 
The  use  of  ICT  as  a  teaching  and  learning  tool  is  to  provide  learners  access  to  large  quantities  of  information  online.  It  also  provides  the 
framework for analysing data to investigate patterns and relationships in a geographical context. Once learners have made their findings, ICT can 
then help them organise, edit and present information in many different ways. 
Learners need to be exposed to the various ICT tools around them, including calculators, radios, cameras, phones, television sets and computer-
related software like Microsoft Office packages – Word, PowerPoint and Excel, as teaching and learning tools. The exposure that learners are 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xix 
given at the primary school level to use ICT in exploring learning will build their confidence and will also increase their level of motivation to 
apply ICT use in later years, both within and outside of education. Thus, the ICT use for teaching and learning is expected to enhance the quality 
and learners’ level of competence in the 4Rs. 
ORGANISATION OF THE CURRICULUM 
The English Language Curriculum is organised into strands, sub-strands, content standards, indicators and exemplars. 
Strands are the broad areas/sections of the English content to be studied. 
Sub-strands are the topics within each strand under which the content is organised.   
Content standard refers to the pre-determined level of knowledge, skill and/or attitude that a learner attains by a set stage of education. 
Indicators are clear outcomes or milestones that learners have to exhibit in each year to meet the content standard expectation. The 
indicators represent the minimum expected standard in a year. 
Exemplars serve as support and guidance, which clearly explain the expected outcomes of indicators and suggest what teaching and learning 
activities could support the facilitators/teachers in the delivery of the curriculum. 
Curriculum Reference numbers 
A  unique  annotation  used  for  numbering  the  strands,  sub-strands,  content  standards  and  indicators  in  the  curriculum for  the  purpose  of  easy 
referencing is shown below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xx 
Curriculum Reference numbers 
A  unique  annotation  used  for  numbering  the  strands,  sub-strands,  content  standards  and  indicators  in  the  curriculum  for  the  purpose  of  easy 
referencing is shown below:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Strand 2: Reading 
Sub-strand 3: Word Families, Rhyming  Endings and Common Digraphs 
B1 B2 B3 
B1.2.3.1: Identify rhyming/endings words 
and common digraphs 
 
B2.2.3.1: Identify rhyming/endings words 
and common digraphs 
 
B3.2.3.1: Identify rhyming/endings words 
and common digraphs 
 
B1.2.3.1.1 Use common rhyming/ending 
words for decoding of words. E.g. –at pat, 
mat, fat, etc 
 
B2.2.3.1.1 Use common rhyming/ending 
words for decoding of words (last syllable 
rhymes). E.g. –or/er doctor, teacher 
B3.2.3.1.1 Use common rhyming/ending 
words for decoding of unknown words.  
 
 
 
 
 
KG1.1.2. 1.1 
 
Sub-strand number 
Strand number                                                                                       
Class/Year 
Learning/Performance Indicator number 
Content Standard number 
Year/Class 
Content Standards Learning Indicator 
Sub-strand Strand 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xxi 
NOTE TO THE TEACHER 
Integration of Skills 
A key concept of this syllabus is the integrated approach to the teaching of language skills.   
This  is  because  Listening,  Speaking,  Reading  and  Writing  complement  one  another  in  use,  while  Grammar  simply  sets  the  rules  for  speaking, 
reading and writing correctly. It is, therefore, advantageous, at this level, to adopt an integrated approach in the teaching of language skills. 
This means, for example, that as you teach a writing/composition lesson, relevant grammatical issues must be raised and explained in relation to 
the writing task. Similarly, such a lesson must have significant aural and oral components. 
Another issue worthy of note is the integration of laudable human values. This is not to shift the focus of language lessons to preaching these 
values. Small doses of these values are fused into literature and composition as well as reading and oral work.  
 
Approach to Grammar 
It  is  important  to  point  out  that  at  the  primary  school,  grammar  is  basically  internalised.  It  must  be  seen  as  an  integral  part  of  listening  and 
speaking  and  treated  as  such.  The  main  task  is  to  assist  learners  to  learn  to use the  listed  language/grammatical  items  correctly  and  fluently. 
These  should  be  introduced  in  meaningful  situations  in  the  context  of  everyday  activities,  modelled  adequately  and  practised orally  by  every 
learner.    As  much  as  is  possible,  the  learners  must  not  be  bothered  with  grammatical  terminologies,  definitions  and  lengthy  explanations  of 
abstract grammatical concepts. 
 
Oral Language (Listening and Speaking) 
The section on Oral Work, referred to as “Listening and Speaking” in this syllabus, has the following segments:  songs, rhymes,  storytelling, 
dramatisation, conversation, listening comprehension, asking and answering questions, giving and responding to 
commands/instructions/directions,  making  and  responding  to  requests    and  presentations.    The  purpose  of  each  of  these  segments  is  to 
encourage learners to listen carefully, recite, sing, carry out instructions and speak English with confidence. In B1 to B3, the Grammar has been 
integrated  into  the  Listening  and  Speaking  as  well  as  Writing  aspects  of  the  lessons.  The  teacher  must  give  the  segments  their  due  weight, 
balance  and  influence  in  the  teaching  process.  Above  all,  the  teacher  must  endeavour  to  get  his/her  learners  to  speak  English,  as  much  as 
possible, for them to be able to acquire effective skills in speaking the English Language.  
 
 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xxii 
Reading Material  
To help the teacher to achieve the indicators of the strand “Reading”, a list of topics for reading has been provided below. The topics have been 
carefully selected to help learners acquire vital information on health issues, as well as information on issues of current interests. The teacher is 
further  encouraged  to  use  his/her  initiative  in  improvising  and  planning  new  materials.  It  is  a  requirement  that  each  learner should  read  five 
books on different topics each term, that is, fifteen books per year. 
 
Supplementary Material  
The teacher is further encouraged to constantly look for other supplementary material which will enhance the teaching/learning especially of the 
sections on “Listening and Speaking” and “Reading”. Material that focus on comprehensive sexuality education, moral, ethical and social values 
such as honesty, diligence, integrity are particularly recommended.  
 
List of Topics for Reading 
The following list of topics has been selected to be used in developing materials for reading from Primary 1 to JHS 3.  The teacher is encouraged 
to look for materials that may be relevant to these topics or select passages from other sources that will be of interest to learners at each class 
level.  Materials  for  reading  must  also  include the  basic  types  of  prose:    narrative,  descriptive,  expository  and  argumentative,  as  well  as  bits  of 
drama and verse. 
The teacher should select relevant and interesting reading materials that will help improve learners’ understanding and use of English at all levels 
of primary school.  
Primary 1-3 
1. Animals – domestic and wild animals  
2. Malaria – how the mosquito spreads malaria 
3. Malaria – how to prevent malaria 
4. Healthy living – balanced meal  
                                 personal hygiene  
                               immunization 
                               body exercise  

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xxiii 
5. Sports and games  
6. Safety in the home, school and community 
7. Forest destruction – bush fires  
8. Forest destruction – cutting trees for firewood 
9. Social, moral & cultural values such as honesty diligence, patriotism, commitment respect for elders,  
      care for public property   
10. Energy: e.g. sources and uses of energy, ways of saving energy in the home, school, and community. 
11. Computers 
12. Climate change awareness 
 
Primary 4-5 
1. Drug abuse 
2. Natural disasters – earthquakes 
3. Natural disasters – floods  
4. Road accidents 
5. Water – sources, importance and uses  
6. Leisure 
7. Communication – letters, telephones e-mail, print and electronic media  
8. Social moral & cultural values such as honesty diligence, patriotism, commitment respect for elders,  
      care for public property   
9. Comprehensive sexuality education 
10. Energy: e.g. sources and uses of energy, ways of saving energy in the home, school, and community,  
       reasons for saving energy. 

© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
xxiv 
11. Computers 
12. Climate change awareness 
 
Primary 6 
1. Comprehensive sexuality education 
2. Teenage pregnancy 
3. HIV/AIDS 
4. Energy – conservation and importance 
5. Inventions 
6. Computers 
7. Forest depletion 
8. Social moral & cultural values such as honesty diligence, patriotism, commitment respect for elders,  
       care for public property. 
9. Entrepreneurship 
10. Climate change awareness 
 
 

 
 
xxv 
Scope and Sequence 
 
STRANDS 
 
SUB STRANDS  
 
B1 
 
B2 
 
B3 
 
B4 
 
B5 
 
B6 
1. ORAL LANGUAGE: 
LISTENING AND SPEAKING 
 
 
SONGS 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
RHYMES 
      
POEMS 
      
STORY TELLING 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
DRAMATIZATION & ROLE PLAY 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
CONVERSATION TALKING ABOUT ONESELF, FAMILY, 
PEOPLE, PLACES, CUSTOMS, EVENTS, CULTURAL 
VALUES, MANNERS, AND OTHER THEMES  
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
LISTENING COMPREHENSION 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
ASKING AND ANSWERING QUESTIONS 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
GIVING AND FOLLOWING COMMANDS/ 
INSTRUCTIONS/DIRECTIONS AND MAKING AND 
RESPONDING TO REQUESTS 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
 PRESENTATION 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
 
2. READING 
PRE-READING ACTIVITIES: 
PRINT CONCEPT 
PHONOLOGICAL/PHONEMIC AWARENESS 
      
PHONICS 
LETTER-SOUND KNOWLEDGE: 
VOWEL SOUNDS and CONSONANT SOUNDS 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
WORD FAMILIES, RHYMING ENDINGS AND  
COMMON DIGRAPHS 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
DIPHTHONGS 
      
BLENDS AND CONSONANT CLUSTERS 
      
VOCABULARY 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 

 
 
xxvi 
SIGHT VOCABULARY 
CONTENT VOCABULARY 
COMPREHENSION 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
 SILENT READING 
   
√ √ √ 
FLUENCY 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
SUMMARISING 
    
√ √ 
3. GRAMMAR USAGE AT 
WORD AND PHRASE 
LEVELS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOUNS 
   
√ √ √ 
DETERMINERS 
   
√ √ √ 
PRONOUNS 
   
√ √ √ 
ADJECTIVES 
   
√ √ √ 
VERBS 
   
√ √ √ 
ADVERBS 
   
√ √ √ 
IDIOMATIC EXPRESSIONS 
   
√ √ √ 
CONJUNCTIONS 
   
√ √ √ 
MODALS 
   
√ √ √ 
PREPOSITIONS 
   
√ √ √ 
ADJECTIVE PHRASE 
   
√ √ √ 
ADVERB PHRASE 
   
√ √ √ 
DIRECT AND REPORTED SPEECH 
   
√ √ √ 
4. WRITING 
        
 
PRE-WRITING ACTIVITIES  
√ 
     
PENMANSHIP/HANDWRITING 
√ √ √ √ √ 
 
WRITING/COPYING LETTERS-SMALL AND CAPITAL 
LETTERS 
√ 
     
LABELING ITEMS  
√ 
     
WRITING SIMPLE WORDS AND SENTENCES  
√ √ √ 
   

 
 
xxvii 
PARAGRAPH DEVELOPMENT 
   
√ √ √ 
CONTROLLED WRITING 
√ 
√ 
    
GUIDED COMPOSITION 
 
√ √ 
   
WRITING AS A PROCESS  
  
√ √ √ √ 
NARRATIVE WRITING 
 
√ √ √ √ √ 
CREATIVE/FREE WRITING 
   
√ √ √ 
DESCRIPTIVE WRITING 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
PERSUASIVE/ARGUMENTATIVE WRITING 
  
√ √ √ √ 
INFORMATIVE/ACADEMIC WRITING 
  
√ √ √ √ 
LETTER WRITING 
   
√ √ √ 
5. USING WRITING 
CONVENTIONS 
/GRAMMAR USAGE 
 
 
 
USING CAPITALIZATION 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
USING PUNCTUATION 
 
√ √ √ √ √ 
USING NAMING WORDS 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
USING ACTION WORDS/VERBS 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
USING QUALIFYING WORDS: ADJECTIVES 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
USING QUALIFYING WORDS: ADVERBS 
  
√ √ √ √ 
USING SIMPLE PREPOSITIONS 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
USING CONJUNCTIONS 
   
√ √ √ 
USING SIMPLE, COMPOUND AND COMPLEX 
SENTENCES  
 
√ √ √ √ √ 
SPELLING 
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
6. EXTENSIVE READING BUILDING THE LOVE AND CULTURE OF READING  
√ √ √ √ √ √ 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC 4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
2 
BASIC 4 
STRAND 1: ORAL LANGUAGE 
Sub-Strand 1: Songs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.1.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of variety 
of songs  
B4.1.1.1.1. Listen attentively to songs and sing them with appropriate 
stress, rhythm and actions 
 Identify a variety of familiar songs from learners’ background. 
 Lead learners to sing the songs with appropriate stress, rhythm and 
intonation. 
 
B4.1.1.1. 2. Identify and discuss values in songs 
 Select suitable songs for listening, singing/recitation from learners’ 
background. 
 e.g.  
- National Anthem 
- National Pledge 
- Ten Galloping Horses Came Through the Town 
 
 After they have listened to the songs and also sang them, lead them to 
identify and discuss the values in the songs. 
Listening and Speaking 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
3 
 
Sub-Strand 3: Poems 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.3.1: Appreciate 
poems and other pieces 
of literary materials  
B4.1.3.1.1. Recite poems with stress, rhythm and actions and interpret 
them in own words 
 Perform a short poem as learners listen and observe. 
 Teach the key words in the poem in context. 
 Have them read it in small groups, pairs and individually. 
 Emphasise correct stress and rhythm. 
 
B4.1. 3.1.2. Identify and discuss values in poems 
 Have learners recite the poem learnt. 
 Put them in groups to discuss the values in the poem. 
 Have groups share their views with the whole class. 
 Engage learners in recitation for mastery. 
 
B4.1. 3.1.3. Compose four-line poems 
 Explain the task. 
 Guide learners with examples to choose a suitable topic and contribute suitable 
lines to it. 
 Write learners ‘contributions to the topic on the board.  
 Re-arrange sentences in a logical order to form a simple poem.  
 In turns, learners read the poem for enjoyment.  
 
Note: Learners should not be made to commit new poems to memory on the same 
day. (It should be spaced over a number of lessons). 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
4 
 
Sub-Strand 4: Story Telling 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.4.1: Respond to 
stories 
 
B4.1.4.1.1. Retell stories sequentially, including key details 
 Tell/read a suitable story to the class e.g. “The Hawk and the 
Hen”. 
 Learners retell the story in detail. 
 Have learners identify the parts of the story as beginning part, 
middle part and ending part.  
 Through questioning, have learners discuss the various parts of 
the story i.e. beginning, middle and ending, as in the table below: 
Title................. 
What was the 
event? 
Where in the story 
did this event 
happen? 
What are the key 
details of this event? 
 Beginning  
 Middle  
 Ending  
 
 Put learners into groups to discuss the central message of the 
story. 
 Have learners retell the story sequentially. 
 
B4. 1.4.1.2. Tell own stories 
 Invite learners to tell their own stories to the class. 
 Have the class discuss the elements in the stories told. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
5 
Sub-Strand 5: Dramatisation and Role Play 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.5.1:  Perform stories 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.1.5.2: Talk about key 
issues in stories/sketches 
 
B4.1.5.1.1. Role-play a story/play 
 Select a suitable story/play learners have heard or read 
 
       e. g. Ananse and the Black Pot. 
 
 Have learners identify and discuss the characters and events/key 
issues in the play/story. 
 Guide learners to role-play the key characters in specific scenes. 
 
B4.1.5.2.1. Identify moral values in sketches and relate them to 
real life situations 
 Have learners discuss the characters and events/key issues in the 
play. 
 Put learners into groups or pairs depending on the number of 
characters in the play/drama. Each group should have a leader.  
 Give scenarios (from the story/play) to groups and have members 
take up roles of the characters. Create dialogues for the sketch 
and have learners prepare to perform the sketch. Go round and 
provide support to groups. 
 Have groups take turns to perform their sketch in front of the 
class.    
 Lead the class with questions to talk about each sketch. They talk 
about what went well, what needs to be improved, suggest 
alternative ways of doing it better, the moral values and how they 
relate to life. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
6 
Sub-Strand 6: Conversation - Talking about Oneself, Family, People, Customs,  
Social/Cultural Values and Manners 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.6.1: Use certain 
culturally acceptable 
language for 
communication 
 
B4.1.6.1.1. Describe/talk about objects, events, dates 
and time 
 Demonstrate the activity by describing a classroom object. 
 Learners give oral descriptions of classroom and other 
familiar objects such as a table, a school bag, a chair and 
others, (Learners may ask questions as the description 
goes on).  
 
Festivals 
 Learners name familiar festivals and talk about them: when 
they are held, why and how they are celebrated, etc. 
Birth days 
 Learners state their birthdays/dates and write them down 
using the two formats indicated in the content. (Teacher 
should check accuracy).  
Telling the Time 
 Using a clock face, assist learners to revise telling the time 
using expressions such as half past 8, quarter past 8, 
quarter to 8, etc. Assist learners to tell the time 
throughout the day: 10 minutes past 8; 25 minutes past 9; 
20 to 11 etc.  
Important places in the country 
 Provide a map of Ghana and assist learners to identify 
important places and talk about them. 
 Have learners locate these places on the map. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
7 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.6.2:  Demonstrate 
positive listening and 
viewing attitudes and 
behaviour by showing 
attentiveness and 
understanding 
B4.1.6.2.1. Listen and view attentively and for a sustained 
period (e.g., look at the person speaking) and maintain eye 
contact. 
 As learners observe and listen attentively, engage in a 
conversation with one of them on a topic e.g. “Important Places 
in the District”. 
 Repeat procedure in bullet one, above, in talking about names 
of regions/places, festivals, date, time, familiar objects, etc. 
 Pairs may be invited to perform in front of the class. 
 
 
B4.1.6.2.2. Listen and view for the entire duration of a text, a 
speech, a presentation,  a video etc. 
 Play a recorded speech by an important personality (e.g. the 
President) on a relevant topic. 
 Have learners listen to the speech carefully. 
 Each learner prepares a speech in an imagined or assumed 
position. 
 Working in groups, each learner delivers his/her speech to the 
group. Groups listen carefully during each delivery. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
8 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.6.3: Use knowledge 
of language and 
communicative skills to 
participate in 
conversation 
 
 
 
B4.1.6.3.1. Engage in collaborative conversation on topics such as 
myself, family, personalities etc. with peers 
 
 Model describing yourself: 
              e.g. name, physical features, character, likes and dislikes etc. 
 Guide learners with appropriate questions to give oral description 
of themselves. 
 Select and describe a family member using relevant vocabulary e.g.  
 sister/brother/parent- name, age 
 how he/she looks like-shape of face, facial marks if any, 
shape of nose, eyes, etc. 
 height, colour and any minute detail that can be used to 
identify the person easily.  
 Guide learners with questions and other activities, to mention the 
name of the Regional Minister for the region in which their school 
is located. 
 Have learners mention names of personalities in politics such as 
the Ministers for Education, Health, Agriculture, etc. 
 Through questions and answers have learners talk about the roles 
and duties of these ministers. 
 Individually, learners talk about their favourite personalities in 
sports, music, and mention their characteristics, and what they like 
about the personalities mentioned. 
 
Note: Ensure that learners use descriptive words. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
9 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.6.3: Use knowledge of 
language and 
communicative skills to 
participate in conversation 
 
B4.1.6.3.2. Demonstrate turn taking in conversation on different 
topics and speak audibly, and expressing thoughts and feelings 
clearly 
 Demonstrate turn taking with a learner earlier prepared. 
 Learners in pairs, take turns to talk about given topics in groups 
observing turn taking. 
 
B4.1.6.3.3. Ask relevant questions to find out opinion of others 
about a given topic 
 Demonstrate the activity using a familiar topic. 
 Learners ask and answer questions for clarification about what 
other learners say on a given topic. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
Sub-Strand 7: Listening Comprehension 
CONTENT STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.7.1: Use appropriate 
skills and strategies to 
process meaning from 
texts 
 
B4.1.7.1. Construct meaning from texts based on knowledge of 
stress, rhythm and intonation 
 Use various types of sentences/utterances to model stress and 
intonation as well as rhythm. You may also read out extracts from 
stories and poems. 
 Ask learners to sing familiar songs clapping and tapping to the 
rhythm. Through discussion, introduce learners to stress, rhythm 
and intonation. 
 In turns, learners use stress, rhythm and intonation that convey 
meaning in making statements and asking questions. 
 Have learners listen to stories such as “Ananse and the Black Pot”, 
“The Hawk and the Hen”, etc. and identify examples of effective 
use of stress, rhythm and intonation. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
10 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.7.1.1: Use 
appropriate skills and 
strategies to process 
meaning from texts 
 
B4.1.7.1.2. Make connections with events in narrative texts 
 Learners retell the story (e.g. in a chain). 
 Guide learners to identify the events in the story. 
 Put learners in small groups to discuss the events of the story and 
relate them to one another. 
 
B4.1.7.1.3. Recognise and discuss moral lessons in a story 
 Through brainstorming, learners identify, discuss and evaluate moral 
lessons in narrative texts heard/read. 
 Have them connect to the characters by relating them to real life 
experiences.  
 
B4.1.7.1.4. Use background knowledge to aid in understanding and 
building new knowledge while listening to narrative texts 
 Have learners listen to a narrative text. 
 Learners in groups identify, discuss and relate the plot of the text to 
a familiar text.  
 Have learners listen to the text a second time. 
 In groups, learners share what they have learnt in the text.  
 
B4.1.7.1.5. Identify the main idea/gist and details of texts 
 Have learners read short stories, newspaper cuttings. 
 Guide them with examples to give the gist and details of the texts. 
 Guide learners to identify the various text contents as they retell 
and discuss texts read. 
 Assist learners to identify themes from the various texts read or 
discussed.  
e. g. love, greed, honesty, hard work, etc.  
 Have them share facts from the story with their peers. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
11 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.7.1.1: Use appropriate 
skills and strategies to 
process meaning from 
texts 
CONT’D 
 
B4.1.7.1.7. Compare and contrast information (two or more 
ideas) from texts 
 Guide learners to compare and contrast the content of 
different texts read/discussed (pay attention to the differences 
and the similarities). 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Sub-Strand 8: Asking and Answering Questions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.8.1: Demonstrate 
understanding in asking 
and answering questions 
correctly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.1.8.1.1. Use appropriate pronunciation and intonation in 
asking and answering questions 
 
 Through role-play, learners ask questions such as: What is your 
name?  How are you? Where do you live? 
 Guide learners to use appropriate pronunciation and intonation in 
asking and answering questions. e.g. What do you want? Where’s 
your school? 
  
Note: A rising intonation for a question and a falling intonation for an answer. 
  
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
12 
 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.8.2: Identify and use 
question tags correctly in 
speech 
CONT’D 
B4.1.8.2.1. Use positive tags, negative tags and auxiliaries in 
speech 
 
 Discuss and explain what question tags are and give examples. 
 Learners in pairs ask and answer questions.  
 Demonstrate the usage of positive and negative tags. 
 Guide learners in oral practice to use positive and negative tags.  
e.g. Question: “You have a pen, don’t you?”  
        Answer: Yes, I do. 
        Answer: No, I don’t. 
 Use the internet to identify the appropriate intonation in asking 
and answering questions. 
 Through role play, learners demonstrate asking and answering 
questions. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Digital Literacy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
13 
Sub-Strand 9: Giving and Following Commands/ Instructions/Directions and  
Making and Responding to Requests 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.9.1: Use verbs 
appropriately in 
commands, requests and 
directions in speech 
B4.1.9.1.1. Give and respond to commands, instructions and 
directions 
 
 Give general commands and guide learners to respond 
appropriately to the commands. 
               e. g. Stand up! Sit down! Carry the bowl! etc. 
 Through role play, group and pair activities, assist learners to give 
and obey simple commands/instructions. 
              e.g.  
i. Go to your seat. 
ii. Bring your exercise book to me. 
iii. Walk from B1 classroom to the Headmaster’s office 
iv. Turn right, walk twenty steps towards the water tank. 
 
 
B4.1.9.1.2. Make and respond to polite requests for help from 
peers 
 Model making a request to learners. 
 Have learners work in groups to write three tasks they plan to 
do and need help, e.g. do homework, carry the table, etc. 
  Learners then go around the class making requests to find 
classmates who are free to help them with their three tasks, 
e.g. 'Can you please help me do my homework this 
afternoon?'. If a learner is free, they accept the request. But if 
s/he is not free, they decline the request. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
14 
Sub-Strand 10: Presentation 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.10.1: Show 
knowledge of spoken 
grammar and register  
 
B4.1.10.1.1. Demonstrate awareness of the features of spoken 
language (contractions, ellipsis e.g. A: How are you? B: Fine)  
 Through role play, demonstrate the features of spoken language.  
           e.g.     Contractions: Can’t, Shouldn’t, etc. 
             Ellipses:     A. How are you? 
                             B. Fine. 
 
B4.1.10.1.2. Demonstrate awareness of the differences between 
spoken and written forms of language e.g. simple and complex 
sentence structures 
 
B4.1.10.1.3. Demonstrate awareness of how meaning is conveyed 
through appropriate pace, stress, tone – through stories read 
aloud 
 Model  reading  aloud  a  level-appropriate  story  or  a  paragraph  with 
good pace, stress or intonation. 
 Read  the  same  story  or  text  aloud  with poor  pace, stress  and 
intonation. 
 Put learners into groups to analyse the types of reading and identify 
which one conveys meaning and why. 
 Have learners practise reading the story with good pace, stress and 
intonation.   
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
15 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.10.2: Demonstrate 
the ability to 
communicate with 
accurate pronunciation 
and appropriate 
intonation 
 
 
 
 
B4.1.10.2.1. Speak clearly and fluently, using the appropriate voice 
qualities (pace, tone etc.) 
 
 Model a speech: choose a familiar topic and make a short speech on 
it. 
 Guide learners to discuss the speech.  
 Have  learners  practise  in  groups  to  select  topics  and  make  short 
speeches  on  them.  Encourage  them  to  speak  clearly  and  fluently 
using the appropriate voice qualities. 
 
B4.1.10.2.2. Read aloud clearly, at a good pace  and with 
expression 
 
 Provide  varied  texts  and  guide  learners  to  read  them  clearly  at  a 
good pace and with good expression. The texts can be in the form 
of poems/rhyme, etc.  
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
B4.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information and 
ideas for a variety of 
purposes  
 
B4.1.10.3.1. Identify the purpose and audience of a speech and set 
goals   in   the   context   of   assigned   topics   (e.g.   about   familiar 
persons) 
 
 Using a model speech which must be provided by the teacher, guide 
learners to identify: 
i. the purpose of the speech 
ii. the audience  
iii. the goals set in the context of assigned topics 
 
Note: the speech can be about self, familiar persons, objects and experiences. 
 
B4.1.10.3.2. Draw on prior knowledge to identify subject matter 
of speech 
Communication and Collaboration 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
16 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information and 
ideas for a variety of 
purposes  
 
B4.1.10.3.3. Gather and select facts and ideas from one or 
multiple print and/ or non-print sources, appropriate to the 
purpose, audience, context and culture 
 
 Guide learners to select interesting topics they want to talk about.  
 Put them into groups and have each group choose a topic. 
 Guide  learners  to  gather  ideas  from  their  readers  and/or  online 
resources.  
 
B4.1.10.3.4. Support ideas and points with visual resources to 
convey meaning appropriate to purpose and context 
 
 Have groups of learners draw pictures to support their ideas or 
points of view on given topics. 
 
B4.1.10.3.5. Use effective introductions and conclusions  
 
 Put learners into convenient groups. 
 Guide them to select topics of interest, plan and present speeches 
to the class. 
 Guide them to introduce and conclude their speeches 
appropriately. 
 
B4.1.10.3.6. Elaborate ideas using explanations 
 
 Explain the need to elaborate points made. 
 Present examples. 
 Guide learners to use details, concrete examples, to elaborate on 
their ideas/points of view on given topics.. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Digital Literacy 
 
Critical thinking and Problem Solving. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
17 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information 
and ideas for a variety 
of purposes  
CONT’D 
 
B4.1.10.3.7. Speak with confidence before peers and maintain eye 
contact 
 
 Encourage learners doing presentations to speak before different 
audience. 
       e. g. small and large groups 
 Invite a learner and model maintaining eye contact while speaking 
with him or her. 
 
Have pairs of learners practise talking to each other on topics of 
interest while maintaining eye contact 
 
 
STRAND 2: READING 
Sub-Strand 2: Phonics 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.2.1: Connect 
sounds to letters; and 
blend letters/syllables in 
order to read and write 
 
B4.2.2.1.1. Match sounds to their corresponding letter/letter 
patterns (e.g. initial/final consonants – m, j, f, s, etc., initial short 
vowels”-a, e, i, o, u”, final “y” as vowel, silent letters etc.)  
 
 
 Introduce the sounds with alphabet songs or rhymes.  
 Guide learners to identify and produce the sounds of given letter 
patterns. 
 e. g. Teacher: Make the sound as I point to each letter. (Learners begin with 
the initial/final consonants, initial short vowels, final y as vowel and silent 
letters). 
 In pairs/ groups, learners identify given letter patterns. 
 Have learners apply their knowledge of consonant digraphs. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
18 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.2.1: Connect 
sounds to letters; and 
blend letters/syllables in 
order to read and write 
CONT’D 
 
B4.2.2.2: Use reading 
readiness and word 
identification skills 
 
B4. 2.2.1.2. Read single-syllable-words with taught consonant 
digraphs (sh-ship, ch-rich, ck-lock) and when reading continuous 
texts 
 
B4. 2.2.1.3. Use words with consonant digraphs to make meaningful 
sentences 
B4.2.2.2.1.Recognise and read words using a variety of cues (e.g.  
prefixes – word beginning) 
 
 Guide learners to understand that the core of a word is its root and 
that other words can be got by additions to a root word.  
 Guide learners to form more words using prefixes. e. g. prefix may 
create new words. 
e.g.  tell – retell 
         over – moreover  
Note: Prefixes may create antonyms (opposites).  
e.g. friendly -  unfriendly  
       satisfied -  dissatisfied  
 In groups, learners identify several prefixes and use them in 
sentences. 
 
PREFIX(before) ROOT(core) NEW  WORD 
Mis Use misuse 
En Joy enjoy 
Anti Clockwise anticlockwise 
De Compose decompose 
Poly Clinic polyclinic 
 
Note: Prefixes have meaning of their own e.g. Ante-before, bi- two,  
           ex- - out of, previous, from etc. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
Reading skills 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Leadership and Personal 
Development 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
19 
 
Sub-Strand 3: Word Families, Rhyming Endings and Common Digraphs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.3.1: Identify 
rhyming/endings words 
and common digraphs 
 
B4.2.3.1.1.Use common rhyming/ending words to decode words.  
e. g. at, pat, mat, fat, etc.  
 
 Revise the lesson on prefixes. Let learners know that just as we have 
family names (surnames), there are words that have the same ending 
that belong to the family of rhyming words.  
 Through brainstorming have learners come up with words that 
belong to a particular rhyming family. Have children identify these 
rhyming words as they read. 
 Have learners hunt for these words and build a portfolio on it. 
 Guide learners to build on words. 
     e.g. –at = cat – bat – hat      -all = call – fall – wall  
     - it = sit – pit – hit          -ot = tot – pot – cot 
 
B4.2.3.1.2. Read words with digraphs to make meaningful sentences 
 
 Revise the lesson on prefixes.   
 Through brainstorming have learners come up with as many words 
that belong to a particular digraph. Have learners identify these 
digraphs as they read. 
 Have learners hunt for these words and build a portfolio on them. 
Ask learners to identify digraphs in simple sentences.  
       e. g. The girls shouted.  sh as in shout 
 
            Note: Common digraphs include ch, ck, gh, gr, sch, sc 
 
 Learners form their own sentences using words with digraphs. 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
20 
 
Sub-Strand 4: Diphthongs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.4.1: Identify and use 
diphthongs  to decode 
words 
 
B4.2.4.1.1. Use closing diphthongs e.g. /ei/, /ai/, /oi/ to make 
meaningful sentences 
 
 Teach one diphthong at a time. 
 Write words with each of the diphthongs on the board. 
Pronounce the words and have learners repeat after you.  
 Learners come up with examples of words that have the 
diphthongs. 
  Have learners identify these diphthongs as they read the words.  
E.g.  
ei - take  
oi - boy 
ai– why, try 
 Learners form their own sentences using words having diphthongs. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
21 
 
Sub-Strand 5: Blends and Consonant Clusters 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.5.1: Identify and 
use consonant blends 
and clusters  in reading 
 
B4.2.5.1.1.Orally produce single-syllable words by blending sounds 
(phonemes), including consonant blends 
 
 Guide learners to play games like “Tapping Out” to bring out the 
single- syllable words. 
 Demonstrate blending by sounding out letters separately and 
blending/bringing them together into syllables and words. 
       e.g. p-l-o-t = plot 
              b-l-a-c-k = black 
              g-r-o-w = grow 
 
 Have learners identify words containing particular blends e.g. bl, br, 
cr, cl, gr, gl  
 
             Tapping Out Game 
                “Tapping Out” is about using the fingers to teach decoding 
/blending the sound of    letters. 
 Each finger represents a letter sound of single-syllable words. 
 Turn your back to the class and raise your right hand. 
 Raise the index finger straight as learners watch. 
 Bring the index finger down to meet the thumb as you make the 
sound. 
 Use fingers to demonstrate blending. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
22 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.5.1: Identify and 
use consonant blends 
and clusters  in reading 
CONT’D 
B4.2.5.1.2. Use the spelling-sound correspondences for common 
consonant digraphs 
 
 Through discussion have learners come up with many words that 
have a particular digraph.  
 Have learners decode these digraphs as they read. 
 Assist learners to get the spelling- sounds correspondence right. 
Play a game of the spelling-sound correspondence of selected 
digraphs. In groups, have learners sound out words and identify the 
digraphs in them. The group that gets a lot of this right carries the 
day.  
e.g.  
             sh:  shoe, show, shirt, shine, shell, shame, shake, shop, bush, wash, 
brush, marsh,  crush, fish 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
23 
Sub-Strand 6: Vocabulary 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.6.1: Understand 
word meanings and 
usages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.2.6.1.1. Use level-appropriate content words (nouns, 
verbs, adjectives and adverbs) and function words 
(prepositions) appropriately in spoken and written 
communication 
 
 Using examples, have learners see the difference 
between content and function words 
 Provide a substitution table of content words and 
function words for learners to construct sentences 
from.  Help learners to sort out the different content 
words and function words in groups.  
 Assist learners to understand that these words combine 
into sentences to help us make proper meaning of them.  
 Let learners make sentences using function and content 
words.  
  
B4.2.6.1.2.Use the following terms: compound word, 
idiom, simile, synonym, antonym, pre-fix, suffix, phrasal 
verb etc. in spoken and written expressions 
 
 Introduce the terms one at a time with several 
examples. 
 Elicit examples from learners. 
 Learners identify examples from different sources, e.g. 
their readers, story books, newspapers (Junior Graphic) 
and use them in sentences of their own. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
24 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.6.2: Build 
vocabulary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.2.6.3: Demonstrate a 
rich vocabulary that 
supports the 
development of 
listening, reading, 
speaking, writing and 
presentation skills 
 
B4.2.6.2.1. Develop a rich vocabulary stock through extensive 
reading of age- appropriate texts 
 
 Introduce learners to a variety of story books and vocabulary 
portfolios and stress the need to build and use the new 
vocabulary in sentences.  
 Display some of the vocabulary in class, on your word trees 
and in sentences. Have learners work in pairs, individually and 
in groups, to do same. 
 Guide learners to make meaning from the context in which 
words have been used. 
 
 
B4.2.6.3.1. Deduce meaning of words from how they are used 
in context e.g. near synonyms: cool – cold – freezing), 
homonyms: flour/flower 
 Using several examples guide learners to make meaning from 
the context in which words have been used.(contextual 
meaning) 
 Learners work in pairs and in groups to work out the meaning 
of given words from their context. 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
25 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
 
B4.2.6.3: Demonstrate a 
rich vocabulary that 
supports the 
development of 
listening, reading, 
speaking, writing and 
presentation skills 
CONT’D 
 
 
 
B4.2.6.4: Use words 
appropriately for 
purpose, audience, 
context and culture 
 
 
 
 
B4.2.6.3.2.Deduce meaning of words from how they relate to one 
another (synonyms, antonyms) 
 
 Reverse the meaning of the terms using examples. 
 Have learners play games (e.g. Synonym Tree Game) to reinforce 
their knowledge of antonyms and synonyms. 
 Ask learners to find synonyms and antonyms of words made from 
context to build on their vocabulary. 
 Learners may match words with their synonyms/antonyms. 
 
 
B4.2.6.4.1. Expand vocabulary stock through affixation 
 
 Revise prefixes and suffixes by breaking down some common 
words into their roots- prefix/suffix components. 
e.g. happy + ness = happiness 
        un + happy + ness = unhappiness 
 Guide learners to play games, e.g. Affixes Game.  
Write prefixes and suffixes on cards. Learners take turns to pick 
these from the basket or bag. If a learner is able to add a root to 
the prefix or the suffix and read out the word correctly, he/she 
keeps it. At the end of the game, the child with the largest number 
of cards wins the game. 
 Learners may also work in groups to derive words using given 
prefixes and suffixes and using them in sentences. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
26 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.6.4: Use words 
appropriately for 
purpose, audience, 
context and culture 
 
 
 
B4.2.6.4.2.Recognise the playful use of words in spoken and 
written language (jokes, riddles) 
 
 In pairs/ groups, have learners play on words in educative jokes, 
riddles and puns. 
e.g.  
Riddle, Riddle: I am something that came into this world with 
earrings. Who am I? 
              Answer:  Coal pot 
 
B4.2.6.4.3.Use words suitable for purpose, audience, context and 
culture in relation to type of texts (exposition/explanation) 
 
 Explain to children the key elements in all writing e.g. purpose, 
audience etc. These help to make the understanding of the text 
easy. That is, they play an integral part of the process. Guide 
learners to understand each key element.  
 Introduce learners to a variety of texts and registers which may be 
used in given situations. 
Have learners work in groups to write short texts on familiar topics. 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
27 
Sub-Strand 7: Comprehension 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.7.1: Process and 
comprehend level-
appropriate texts 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.2.7.1.1. Construct meaning from texts read 
 
 Select level-appropriate texts for learners. 
 Take learners through Before Reading activities such as picture 
walk, prediction and Before Reading questions etc. to elicit their 
prior knowledge. 
 Have learners use their previous knowledge/experience, contextual 
clues and While Reading questions to make meaning from the 
text as they read. 
 Provide After Reading questions to help learners make meaning 
from the text read. 
 
B4.2.7.1.2. Note and recall main ideas in a sequence 
 
 Using the SQ3R strategy, learners recall main ideas. Learners: 
 
S – Survey the text- (learners skim, by going through the chapter, 
noting heading/sub-heading and other understanding features.  
Q – Question– Generate questions about the content of the text. 
 
3R 
Read –   Read for more information. 
Recite – Retrieve information from meaning. 
Review – Go over the main ideas in the text using your own 
words. 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
28 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.7.1: Process and 
comprehend level-
appropriate texts 
 
B4.2.7.1.3.Skim for main ideas in texts 
 Guide learners to scan/skim the text either for general or specific 
information as a preparation for detailed reading. 
 
B4.2.7.1.4. Read level-appropriate texts silently and closely for 
comprehension. 
 
 Briefly discuss the need for silent reading. 
 Guide learners with pre-reading questions. 
 Assign them to read the text silently to find answers to the pre-
reading questions. 
 
Note: Depending on the length of the text, it may be read in bits. 
 
Reading skills 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
B4.2.7.2: Apply critical 
reading, implied 
meaning, higher order 
thinking, judgment and 
evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.2.7.2.1. Respond to a text with reasons 
 
 Identify and present points of view in a text. 
 Guide learners with questions to discuss the text and answer a 
variety of questions. They should state reasons for their points/ 
point of view. 
 
B4.2.7.2.2.Make connections between a text and personal 
experiences/real life. 
 
 Guide learners with questions e.g. applicative questions to connect 
the reading text with background knowledge. 
 Encourage learners to come up with their personal opinions and 
viewpoints. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
29 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.7.3:  Demonstrate 
an understanding of the 
use of words and phrases 
as used in a text 
 
 
 
 
B4.2.7.3:  Demonstrate 
an understanding of the 
use of words and phrases 
as used in a text 
B4.2.7.2.3. Demonstrate awareness of the structure of texts (e.g. 
introduction, body, conclusion) 
 
 Guide learners to identify the parts of a text e.g. Introduction, 
Body and Conclusion.  
 They should summarise each part and after that, make a full 
summary of the text. 
 
 
 
B4.2.7.3.1.  Determine the contextual meaning of words and 
phrases  
 
 Phrases have their meaning different from the individual words. 
Guide learners to make the right meaning using the text to get the 
contextual meaning. 
Critical Thinking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
30 
 
Sub-Strand 8: Silent Reading 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.8.1: Construct 
meaning from texts read 
 
B4.2.8.1.1. Read silently and reasonably for meaning from level-
appropriate texts 
 
 Learners read silently making reference to pictures, illustrations, etc. to 
make meaning of texts. Encourage learners to do independent work. 
Note: You may guide learners with questions to do this. 
 
B4.2.8.1.2. Find meaning of words as used in context 
 
 Guide pupils to learn new words through the procedure below; 
 Write key words on the board, one at a time. 
 Have learners attempt to pronounce the word. 
 Model the pronunciation for learners to repeat. 
 From the passage, ask learners to write the sentence in which the 
new word is and read it out. 
 Use Think-Pair-Share strategy to have learners find meaning in 
context. 
 Have them think of other words that can replace these words. 
 Ask pupils to use the words in sentences. 
 
Note: You can vary the procedure in teaching new words. 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
31 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.8.1: Construct 
meaning from texts read 
 
B4.2.8.1.3. Answer questions based on the passage read 
 
 Precede questions with silent reading of the text. 
 In asking questions, follow the steps below: 
 Pose the question. 
 Give learners time to reflect. 
 Call a learner to answer the question. 
 Learners give accurate and specific answers to questions. (You 
could do it orally sometimes). They may read out portions of the 
text where the answers are found. 
 Ask different types of levels of questions. 
 
Critical Thinking and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
Sub-Strand 9: Fluency 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.9.1: Read fluently 
to enhance 
comprehension 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.2.9.1.1. Read grade- level texts at good pace, with 
accuracy and expression 
 
 Take learners through pre-reading, while-reading and 
after-reading activities. 
 In cases where text books are not available, teacher should 
use carefully selected grade- level appropriate texts. 
 As learners listen and follow in their books, read a paragraph 
or two aloud at a good pace, with accuracy and expression. 
 Have individuals take turns to practise reading aloud at a good 
pace, with accuracy and expression. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
Personal Development and Leadership 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
32 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.8.1: Construct 
meaning from texts read 
 
B4.2.9.1.2. Use recognition strategies to confirm understanding 
of level-appropriate texts 
 
 As learners read the grade-level texts, attention should be given to 
the words, sentences and paragraphs. 
Use re-reading, vocabulary and right intonation to self-correct. 
Critical Thinking and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
Sub-Strand 10: Summarising 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.10.1: Read and 
summarise passages 
read 
 
B4.2.10.1.1.Summarise level-appropriate passages/texts orally  
 
 Learners read and re-read a text to identify the main idea in a 
given paragraph.  
 Guide learners with examples to restate information read in a 
few words. 
 
B4.2.10.1.2. Write short summary of a level-appropriate 
passage/text read 
 
 Guide learners to write a summary of the passages taking note of 
the main ideas. 
 In pairs or groups, learners summarise specific paragraphs of a 
passage to be presented to the class. 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
Personal Development and Leadership 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
33 
STRAND 3: GRAMMAR USAGE AT WORD AND PHRASE LEVELS 
Sub-Strand 1: Nouns 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.3.1.1.1. Identify and use nouns in phrase to identify people, 
animals, events and objects 
 
 Have learners read simple sentences having names of people, 
animals, events and objects from the board. 
 Put learners in groups to identify the names of people, animals, 
events and objects as nouns. 
 Have learners form sentences with names of people, animals, events 
and objects and underline these nouns in the sentences. 
 Have them note that common nouns start with small letters.  
 Have learners identify common nouns from paragraphs/passages. 
 
B4.3.1.1.2. Identify and use: Proper nouns- refer to cities and 
countries and), Common nouns  
 
a. Proper Nouns 
 Have learners read simple sentences having names of cities and 
countries from the board. 
 Put learners into groups to identify the names of cities and countries 
on a globe or map. 
 Learners form sentences with names of other cities and countries. 
 Have learners identify proper nouns from paragraphs/passages. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
34 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
CONT’D 
 
 
b. Common Nouns 
 Introduce common nouns in context. 
 Have learners read simple sentences containing common nouns on 
the board. 
 Put learners into groups to identify the common nouns.  
 Have learners form sentences using the common nouns identified. 
 Have learners identify common nouns from paragraphs/passages. 
 
 
B4.3.1.1.3.Identify and use collective nouns to refer to a group of 
objects and people 
 Have learners read sentences containing collective nouns e.g. team, 
class, a swarm of bees, a troop of monkeys, a flock of sheep, a bunch 
of keys. 
 Explain to learners that collective nouns behave like singular nouns. 
Therefore, they are used with singular verbs. 
 Provide the collective nouns and their groups for learners to 
identify. Let them form sentences using the collective nouns. 
              e.g.  
i. A bunch of keys is on the table. 
ii. A team of players is running around the field. 
 
 Have learners form sentences with collective nouns. 
 
 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
35 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
 
 
B4.3.1.1.4. Identify and use abstract nouns to refer to concepts and 
ideas. 
 
 Write sentences containing abstract nouns on the board. 
 Have learners take turns to read them and identify the nouns. 
 Explain abstract nouns as names of things that cannot be seen, felt, 
nor touched 
              e. g. air, beauty, peace, etc. 
 Have learners give examples of abstract nouns, use them in 
sentences and underline them. 
 Learners identify concrete and abstract nouns from short 
paragraphs/passages. 
 
 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
36 
 
 
Sub-Strand 2: Determiners 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.2.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of determiners in 
communication 
 
B4. 3.2.1.1. Identify and use the definite and indefinite articles‘a’ 
and ‘an’ to refer to a     person, animal, event, time or objects in 
general 
 
 Note: Teacher should use level-appropriate vocabulary to teach the articles 
 Have learners read sentences containing articles. 
 Indefinite articles: e.g. I bought an orange. 
              a car, a sheep, a tree, an apple, an orange, an egg, etc. 
 Definite article: I put the book on the table. 
 Use several examples to explain the use of the definite and 
indefinite articles. 
 Nouns such as music, soup, soap, do not require any determiners. 
Thus show further that it is possible to say: 
i. I love music. 
ii. I enjoy soup. 
 Put learners into small groups to form sentences with a, an, the. 
 
B4.3.2.1.2. Identify and use quantifiers to show quantities 
 Numerals (cardinals: one, two) 
 Some, few/little, etc. 
 No, all/every 
 Have learners read sentences with quantifiers from the board. 
        e. g. some, few/little, one, two, No, all /every etc. 
Put some pictures on the wall. 
 Use more examples to show that these quantifiers are used with 
non-countable nouns: few, little, etc. 
               e. g. little water, little bread, few books, etc. 
 Have learners write sentences using quantifiers e.g. many books, a 
piece of chalk and identify them from given sentences/texts. 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Leadership and Personal 
Development 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
37 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4. 3.2.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of determiners in 
communication 
CONT’D 
B4.3.2.1.3. Identify and use possessive pronouns to show 
possession 
 My, your, his, etc. 
 
 Write sentences with possessive pronouns on the board and have 
learners read them. 
              e.g.  
i. I gave my pen to John. 
ii. The women went to their rooms. 
 
 Have learners form oral sentences using possessive pronouns. 
 Put them into groups to use possessive pronouns to write 
sentences and underline the possessive pronouns.   
 
B4.3.2.1.4 .Identify and use demonstratives:  
 this/that, these/those 
 
 Write sentences with demonstratives. 
i. This boy is from Cape Coast. 
 
 Have learners read the sentences aloud. 
 Explain to learners the use of the demonstratives. 
        e.g. 
  “this” and “that” are used before singular nouns e.g. this 
girl, that girl. 
 
B4.3.2.1.5. Identify and use interrogative determiners “which, 
whose”– to find out about specific persons or objects 
 
 Present several examples in context and explain their use. 
 Have learners identify them in sentences and short texts. 
 Let them use the interrogatives in their own sentences. 
              e. g. Which house is bigger? 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Leadership and Personal 
Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Leadership and Personal 
Development 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
38 
Sub-Strand 3: Pronouns 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of  different 
types of  pronouns in 
communication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.3.3.1.1. Identify and use different types of pronouns: 
- “Personal” – to identify people, activities and objects 
- “Interrogative” – “who, what” to find out a person’s 
identity, specific information about a person, time, objects 
or events 
 
i. Personal pronouns – I, You, He/She, We, etc. 
 Write sentences with personal pronouns.  
        e. g. You are late. 
 Provide learners with a variety of practice activities. 
 
ii. Interrogative pronouns – Who, What, Where, etc. 
 Introduce interrogative pronouns with several examples in context. 
 Provide a passage and have learners identify interrogative   
pronouns. 
 Let learners use interrogative pronouns in sentences. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
39 
Sub-Strand 4: Adjectives 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.4.1: Apply the 
knowledge of adjectives 
in communication 
 
 
 
B4.3.4.1.1. 1. Use adjectives to make comparison e. g: 
 fast/slow (Ama is fast but Kofi is slow) 
 good/bad 
 fast/faster 
 slow/slower 
 
 Revise adjectives. Have learners identify adjectives in sentences and 
use them in sentences of their own. 
 
 Introduce regular adjective forms: 
-   Regular adjectives form their imperative by adding er 
              e.g. small-smaller, big-bigger, etc. 
 Assist learners with examples to use comparative adjectives 
appropriately. 
               e.g. 
i. Ama is taller than Kwesi. 
ii. This ruler is longer than that one. 
 
 Learners form sentences with the comparative forms of adjectives. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
40 
Sub-Strand 5: Verbs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
 
B4.3.5.1.1. Use  different types of verbs: 
 Main verb 
 Helping verb (primary auxiliary and modal auxiliary) 
 
            Main verbs 
 Have learners revise verbs by reading sentences from the board and 
identifying the verbs. 
 Have learners write sentences with given verbs. 
 
             Auxiliary verbs 
 Let learners read sentences with auxiliary verbs. 
              e.g. 
i. The boy is going to school. 
ii. The girls are reading. 
 
Note: An auxiliary verb is also known as a helping verb e.g. is, are, am, was, were 
 Have learners use auxiliary verbs in sentences and underline them. 
 
 
B4.3.5.1.2.Use appropriate subject-verb agreement 
 Singular/plural 
 Revise nouns and verbs with simple examples. 
 Through discussion and examples help learners to realise rules that 
govern sentence formation: 
- A Singular subject goes with singular verb. 
 e. g. The boy is in the room. 
- A Plural subject goes with a plural verb.  
e. g. The girls are happy. 
- Collective nouns take singular verb.  
e. g. The team is playing tomorrow. 
 Provide sentences for groups to identify the subjects and verbs. 
 Have learners write their own sentences to be presented to the class. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
41 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
 
B4.3.5.1.3. Use the simple present form of verbs in sentences: 
 For habitual actions 
 For timeless and universal statements 
 For facts which may change or hold true indefinitely 
 For instantaneous  present 
 For scheduled future actions 
 
 Using several examples demonstrate the use of the simple present form of 
verbs in the sentences (for habitual actions/ for timeless and universal 
statements): 
 Habitual actions. 
              e.g.  
i. Esi reads every day. 
ii. Joe sweeps every morning. 
 Create situations for learners to use verbs to express habitual actions. e.g. Tell 
the class what you do every morning. 
 Timeless and universal statements. 
e.g.  
i. The sun rises in the east and sets in the west. 
ii. Ghana is in Africa. 
 Provide ample practice using language drills. 
 
 
B4.3.5.1.4. Use regular form of the simple past tense of verbs 
 Regular e.g. play-played 
 Revise main and auxiliary verbs by having learners identify them in 
sentences. 
 Introduce learners to the concept of regular verbs: 
- Regular verbs form their past tense by adding “d” or “ed” 
e.g. play= played, walk= walked, bake= baked 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
42 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
CONT’D 
 
 Elicit examples from learners and have them use them in sentences. 
- The irregular verbs form their past tense differently. They do 
not add “d” or “ed”. 
 Provide a passage having regular and irregular verbs in the present 
tense. 
 Learners rewrite the sentences in the past. 
 
B4.3.5.1.5. Use the simple past form of verbs for:  
 Completed actions or events  
 Regular actions in the past 
 Revise the simple present tense by having learners say what they do 
regularly e.g. every morning. 
 Learners listen to a simple story in which several completed actions 
have occurred. 
 Discuss the story and have learners identify the verbs. 
 Learners engage in a conversion drill for practice. 
 Learners write simple sentences in the past tense using (both regular 
and irregular verbs). 
 
B4.3.5.1.6. Use the simple present form of verbs to relate past events 
to the present 
 
B4.3.5.1.7. Use the imperative form of the verb to give commands or 
orders, make suggestions 
 
 Use situations to demonstrate commands. 
 Provide situations for learners to give and respond to commands in 
parts or groups. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
43 
Sub-Strand 6: Adverbs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.6.1: Apply the 
knowledge of different 
types of adverbs in 
communication 
 
 
 
B4.3.6.1.1. Use adverbs of time and place appropriately 
 Revise adverbs by having learners identify them in sentences. 
 Present adverbs of place in context. 
 Provide practice in identifying and using adverbs. For practice use 
questions and answers, and illustrations. 
 Drill for learners to practise the appropriate use of adverbs of place. 
              e.g.   
i. Where is the cat?       The cat is here. 
ii. Where is Kojo?             Kojo is outside. 
 Examples of adverbs of place are: here, there, outside, inside, etc. 
 Ask learners to use adverbs of place to form correct sentences. 
 
B4.3.6.1.2. Use adverbs of time to modify verbs. 
 
 Present adverbs of place in context. 
             Examples of adverb of time are yesterday, today, tomorrow, etc. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
44 
Sub-Strand 7: Idiomatic Expressions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.7.1: Understand 
and use idiomatic 
expressions 
appropriately in speech 
and in writing 
B4.3.7.1.1. Use idiomatic expressions appropriately in 
communication 
 Present examples of idiomatic expressions in context. 
 Discuss each with learners to bring out it’s meaning. 
 Have learners use the expressions they have learnt in sentences 
guided with further examples. 
 Put learners into groups to determine the meaning of given idiomatic 
expressions in context. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
Sub-Strand 8: Conjunctions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.8.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
conjunctions in speech 
and in writing 
B4.3.8.1.1. Identify and use simple conjunctions - and, but, or, nor 
- to link:  
- similar ideas  
- contrasting ideas, show choices/express alternatives 
 Introduce the conjunctions one at a time in context. 
 Elicit examples of sentences with conjunctions from learners. 
 Put on cards simple sentences. 
              e.g.  
i. Esi is tall. Ama is short. 
ii. Esi is tall but Ama is short. 
 
 Use Combination Drill for learners to practise the use of 
conjunctions.               e.g. 
i. Learner A: I bought a pen... 
ii. Learner B: I bought a pen and a notebook.  
iii. Learner C: I will eat fufu...... 
Learner D: I will eat fufu or kenkey. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
45 
Sub-Strand 9: Modals 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.9.1: Apply the 
knowledge of modals in 
speech and in writing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.3.9.1.1. Use modals to express a variety of meanings: 
 can: conveys ability 
 may: asks for permission, expresses politeness, 
possibility 
 must: obligation or compulsion, necessitys 
 shall / will: prediction, intention, determination etc.   
 could: tentativeness, politeness  
 would: politeness 
 might: possibility 
 should: obligation 
 used to: for past activities or events 
 have to, ought to and need to: for obligation 
 
 Introduce the modals one at a time. 
 Have learners read sentences containing modals. 
 Learners use modals to form sentences and choose the right 
modals to fill the gaps. 
 Use drills to give practice. 
 
             Note: Modals come before the main verbs in sentences. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
46 
 
Sub-Strand 10: Prepositions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.10.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
prepositions in oral and 
written communication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.3.10.1.1. Use prepositions to convey a variety of meanings:  
- Direction e.g. along 
- Period of Time 
- Purpose 
- Possession 
- Comparison e.g. taller than 
 
 Have learners describe the positions of classroom objects using such 
sentences as: 
i. The clock is on the wall. 
ii. The cupboard is in the corner. 
iii. The waste paper basket is under the table. 
 
 Briefly explain the functions of prepositions. 
 Introduce a Question and Answer drill to give learners practice. 
Learner A: Where is your pen? 
Learner B: It is on the table. 
 Write some of learners’ answers on the chalkboard and guide them 
to identify the prepositions. 
 
Note: Ensure that the following prepositions are used: 
 Direction= towards the mountain 
 Time = at six o’clock 
 Purpose = for, in order to 
 Possession= for, to 
 Comparison= than 
 Support or opposition = for you, against me 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
47 
STRAND 4: WRITING 
Sub-Strand 2: Penmanship and Handwriting 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.2.1: Copy and 
rewrite sentences 
correctly 
B4.4.2.1.1. Write clearly using joined letters of consistent size 
 Stage 1 : Write letters with a flick e.g. a, t,  m,  n,  w,  d 
 Stage 2: Join pairs of letters. e.g. at,  am,  et,  de 
 Stage 3:  Join the letters of a word. e.g. and , kettle,  can,  catch 
 
 
 
 
 Stage  4: Copy sentences and passages 
 
      Procedure: 
 Demonstrate the exercise 
 Give practice 
 Give exercise 
 Provide feedback 
 
B4.4.2.1.2. Use simple sentences clearly and correctly 
 Begin proper nouns with capital letters in sentences. 
e.g.  
i. Accra is the capital of Ghana. 
ii. Esi went to Mfantsiman School. 
 
 Have learners read out sentences and identify proper nouns. 
  Let learners note the use of capital letters. 
 Have them copy the sentences into their exercise books. 
 Present and give practice on the named marks of punctuation 
similarly: 
e.g. 
i. She is a teacher. 
ii. How are you? 
iii. I bought a pencil, ruler and a book. 
Personal Development 
  
Communication and Collaboration 
kettle, can, catch, and 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
48 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.2.1: Copy and 
rewrite sentences 
correctly 
CONT’D 
 
 
 Discuss the importance of these punctuation marks. 
i. Full stop (.) marks the end of a sentence. 
ii. Question mark (?) is used to ask questions. 
iii. Comma (,) is used when listing items. 
 
Personal Development 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
Sub-Strand 6: Paragraph Development 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.6.1: Develop, 
organise and 
express ideas 
cohesively in 
writing for a 
variety of 
purposes, 
audience, and 
contexts 
 
B4. 4.6.1.1. Choose appropriate ways and modes of writing for a variety of 
purposes, audience, and contexts, and organise facts, ideas and/ or points of 
view in a way appropriate to the mode of delivery, using appropriate text 
features 
 
 Select sample essay types/ texts showing a variety of modes of writing from 
learners' readers and/teacher's resource. 
 
e.g. 
i. Expository Writing - how something works. 
ii. Narrative - how something happened. 
iii.  Description - how something/someone appears. 
iv. Argument - how an opinion can be stated and supported. 
 
 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
49 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.6.1: Develop, 
organise and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing for a variety of 
purposes, audience, and 
contexts  
CONT’D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.4.6.1: Develop, 
organise and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing and 
representing for a 
variety of purposes, 
audience, and contexts 
 
 Put learners into groups of five.  For each mode of writing, give a 
sample text to each group to study and,  through appropriate 
questions, guide them to identify the following: 
i. the main idea(s) 
ii. the mode of writing 
iii. the purpose 
iv. the audience 
 
Note: Present one mode of writing at a time. For each mode of writing, 
select a paragraph, jumble the sentences and have learners rearrange 
them into a coherent piece. (Rearrangement of jumbled sentences). You 
may also use other controlled composition strategies such as matching, 
completion and blank filling. 
 
 
B4. 4.6.1.2. Identify the main idea and minor ideas/supporting 
details in a paragraph 
 Provide sample paragraphs that have main ideas and supporting 
details. 
 Discuss one of these and guide learners to identify the main and 
supporting ideas. 
 Have learners work in groups of four to read and identify the main 
idea and supporting ideas. Guide them with the questions: 
i. What is the paragraph talking about/What is the main idea in 
the paragraph?  
ii. Which sentence has the main idea? 
Which sentences say something about the main idea? 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Personal Development 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
50 
Sub-Strand 9: Writing as a Process 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4. 4.9.1: Apply the 
skills and strategies for 
idea generation, 
selection, development, 
organisation and 
revision in writing 
 
B4. 4.9.1.1 Select a topic of choice on issues in the immediate 
environment, brainstorm and organise ideas before writing  
 Take learners through the writing process: 
 
Prewriting stage 
 Put learners in groups of four (4). Each member suggests a topic. Each 
group discusses it’s topics and selects one. Each team presents their 
topic to the class and writes it on the board. 
 Have groups plan their composition by identifying and discussing the 
purpose, audience and the context of the piece. 
 Invite groups to present their work and have the whole class give 
feedback.  
 Use learner strategies such as brainstorming to help learners generate 
ideas appropriate to the topic.  
 Have learners use graphic organisers to organise the ideas generated. 
 
             e. g.  
             Brainstorming 
 Brainstorming involves expressing one's own views and ideas to 
contribute to resolve a problem. 
 The activity can be done as a whole class, in small groups or in pairs. 
The high ability learners may take leading roles. 
 
Note: Do not evaluate learners' ideas but accept and record each idea on the 
board. Assure them that they are not required to justify or explain the ideas they 
generate.  
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership Skills 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
51 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
 
B4.4.9.2: Develop and 
express ideas 
coherently and 
cohesively in writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.4.9.3: Apply 
strategies for 
improving drafts for 
publishing 
 
 
B4.4.9.2.1. Develop ideas into a one-paragraph draft using 
appropriate nouns or pronouns within and across sentences to aid 
cohesion and avoid ambiguity 
Writing stage 
 Have learners work independently to write a first draft. Advise 
learners to: 
i. Concentrate on getting ideas on paper, not to produce a 
perfect piece of writing. 
ii. Use the ideas generated but feel free to add new ideas that 
occur to them as they write. 
 
 Be sure their writing has a beginning, middle and an ending. 
 
B4.4.9.3.1. Review and revise the one-paragraph draft taking out 
irrelevant details 
 Have pupils revise their first draft. Ask them to set aside their first 
draft for a while and return to it to read over slowly and critically, 
and reread it several times. 
 Have learners use these questions as a revision guide: 
i. Is my topic interesting? 
ii. Does the beginning catch the reader’s attention? 
iii. Are the ideas easy to understand? 
iv. Do all the sentences say something about the topic? 
 
 Encourage learners to make as many changes as necessary to 
improve their work. 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
52 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.9.3: Apply 
strategies for 
improving drafts for 
publishing 
CONT’D 
 
B4.4.9.3.2. Proofread draft, checking capitalisation, usage, 
punctuation and spelling 
 Have learners proofread the revised draft of their writing with focus 
on the conventions of punctuation, capitalisation, spellings, etc. 
 Let them do peer editing. Learners check their partners’ writing for 
errors (punctuations, spelling, etc.) 
 Have learners write a neat final copy and read it once again to check 
for errors. 
 
B4.4.9.3.3. Display writing piece for other peers to read 
 Have learners publish their work by preparing and showing it to 
others in small groups or in pairs. Allow them to post their work on 
the notice board or walk to show it to all other learners in the class 
one after the other. 
Encourage learners to share their work with their family members. 
Have them keep their work in their portfolios. They may type their 
work and publish it in the class magazine. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
53 
Sub-Strand 10: Narrative Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.10.1: Narrate 
situations, express 
feelings and convey 
point of view about the 
world/ or fictional 
world 
 
B4.4.10.1.1. Write about real or imagined experiences or events 
following story structure (beginning, middle and ending), using 
appropriate noun or pronoun within and across sentences to aid 
cohesion. 
i. Describing the setting and developing the plot (events 
in the story) 
ii. Describing characters with elaboration 
iii. Using first and third persons 
 
 Guide learners to narrate an event they participated in e.g. My first 
day at the national theatre. Learners tell the story sequentially: 
beginning, middle and end. (Learners are grouped to write their own 
story based on a chosen experience agreed by all. Let them build a 
mind map to guide their writing.) 
 
 Let learners use adjectives and adverbs in describing the physical 
appearance and state of their characters. 
 
 Guide them with examples to write from the first person point of 
view to start with and later change the same story to read  from the 
third person point of view. 
 
 Learners edit their work first in their groups, then across groups. Let 
learners then publish their stories on the class notice board so each 
group can read another’s story. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
54 
Sub-Strand 11: Creative/Free Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.11.1: Create texts 
 
 
 
B4.4.11.1.1. Write freely about topics of choice in their immediate 
environment 
 
 Have learners, in pairs, think-pair-share and choose a topic from their 
immediate environment they will want to write about.  
 Guide learners to brainstorm and generate ideas. 
 Have learners organise their ideas and write their first draft.  
 They then peer edit their work. 
 Have them present their work for class discussion and correction. 
 They then write the final draft and display their work for their peers to 
read. 
 
B4.4.11.1.2. Write poems and imaginative, narrative stories and 
illustrate them 
 
 Guide learners to read a poem and let them write a parallel one to 
start as group presentations. 
 Learners then choose topics and write a four or five line poem and 
illustrate it. 
 Guide them to edit each other’s work by exchanging with other groups. 
 Have groups present their work to the class. 
 Encourage reactions from the class. 
 
Imaginative narrative 
 Guide learners through relevant questions to write imaginative stories 
on topics/themes of their choice. 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
55 
Sub-Strand 12: Descriptive Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.12.1: Demonstrate 
knowledge of descriptive 
words/expressions in 
writing 
 
B4.4.12.1.1. Use descriptive words/expressions to describe places, 
personal experiences and events 
 
Note: The teacher should consider level-appropriate vocabulary and grammar 
 
 Revise adjectives by having learners describe familiar people, objects 
and places in their environment.  
 Learners in their groups talk about interesting places they have 
visited. 
 Guide them to describe places of their choice using knowledge of 
adjectives. 
 Have them do peer editing and share their work with the class.  
 They repeat the procedure above to describe events, situations and 
personal experiences. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development  
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
Sub-Strand 13: Argumentative/Persuasive Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.13.1: Support an 
opinion in writing 
 
B4.4.13.1.1.  Support opinions with simple sentences 
 Present a motion to learners.  
 e. g. A doctor is more important than a farmer. 
 Discuss the meaning and implication of the motion with pupils and 
invite them to take a stand either for or against the motion. 
 Put learners into two groups: for the motion and against the motion 
and write down what they think about it. 
 Groups read out their opinions to the class for discussions. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
56 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.13.2: Write 
arguments to support 
claims with clear 
reasons and relevant 
evidence 
B4.4.13.2.1. Introduce claim(s) and support them with clear reasons 
and relevant evidence 
 Working in groups (as in B4.7.1.1), learners provide reasons for the 
opinions they hold on a topic. 
 Guide groups to provide evidence for the opinions they hold. 
 Have groups present their work for discussions.   
 
B4.4.13.2.2. Use words, phrases, and clauses to clarify the 
relationships between claim(s) and reasons 
 Lead learners to discuss appropriate language for arguments e. g. use of 
adjectives in their various forms. 
 You may read out model argumentative essays to guide learners as they 
listen carefully to identify useful phrases, clauses and expressions. 
 
B4.4.13.2.3. Establish and maintain a formal style 
 Using models, discuss the basic structure of an argumentative piece: 
- Introduction. 
- Reasons for the stand taken. 
- Conclusion. 
 
 Have groups present full compositions using this structure for class 
discussions. 
 
B4.4.13.2.4. Provide a concluding statement that follows from 
argument presented 
 Have learners listen to a debate on a familiar topic. 
 learners in groups discuss the debate. 
 Teach the features of a debate. 
Guide learners to select a debatable topic.  Divide the class into two to go 
through the writing process to prepare to debate on the topic. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
57 
Sub-Strand 14: Expository/Informative Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.14.1: Write 
informative essays 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.4.14.1.1. Write words giving information about family 
 Guide learners with a model to talk about themselves. This is a whole 
class discussion with individual learners saying things about 
themselves. 
 Let learners write about themselves.  In pairs learners edit each 
other’s work and identify words and sentences that give information 
about the partner which they did not know previously. 
 In groups learners research about their school and write a short 
history about it. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.4.14.2: Write an 
event of the day 
 
B4.4.14.2.1. Write picture events about personal experiences and 
make  radio/TV presentations 
 Let learners watch TV news at home and write their own news from 
the pictures they see. 
 Put learners into groups. Let them brainstorm and write activities of 
the day.  
 Let each group choose an interesting event and write the news to 
broadcast to the class.  
 Let each group choose one person to present the news. 
 Help learners to organise a radio or TV talk show. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
58 
Sub-Strand 15: Letter Writing 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.15.1: Write 
informal letters on  
given topics 
 
B4.4.15.1.1. Write to friends about personal experiences using 
appropriate letter formats 
 Present samples of friendly letters to learners. 
 Let learners read samples in groups and identify important 
features of friendly letters.  
 Discuss these features with learners. 
 Each group writes a friendly letter (about their personal 
experiences) showing the important features. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
STRAND 5: USING WRITING CONVENTIONS/ GRAMMAR USAGE 
Sub-Strand 2: Using Punctuation 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.2.1: Show 
understanding of how 
punctuations are used 
appropriately in writing 
 
B4.5.2.1.1. Use the comma: 
 before and  after "Yes" and "No" in sentences 
 after addressing a person, e.g. Kofi, can you help me? 
 
 Provide learners with sample texts for them to identify the target 
punctuation marks.  e.g. 
Yes, please.  
No, thank you. 
 Kofi, can you help me? 
 
 Give them practice in using the punctuation marks. They may 
copy and punctuate unpunctuated sentences and short 
paragraphs. 
 Have them write sentences to demonstrate understanding of the 
use of the  comma before and  after "Yes" and "No" in sentences; 
- after addressing a person. 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving. 
 
Communication and collaboration  

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
59 
Sub-Strand 3: Naming words/ Nouns 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
 
B4.5.3.1.1. Identify and use nouns in phrase in sentences to 
identify people, animals, events and objects 
 Have learners read simple sentences with names of people, 
animals, events and objects on the board. 
 Put learners in groups to identify the names of people, animals, 
events and objects as nouns. 
 Have learners form sentences with names of people, animals, 
events and objects and underline these names/nouns in the 
sentences. 
 Have them note that common nouns start with small letters.  
 Have learners identify common nouns from paragraphs/passages. 
 
B4.5.3.1.2. Identify and use: 
 Proper nouns- refer to cities and countries  
 Common nouns  
  
Proper nouns 
 Have learners read simple sentences with names of cities and 
countries from the board. 
 Put learners into groups to identify the names of cities and 
countries.  
 Have learners identify proper nouns from paragraphs/passages. 
 Have learners form sentences with names of other cities and 
countries. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
60 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
CONT’D 
Common nouns 
 
 Introduce common nouns in context. 
 Have learners read simple sentences with common nouns from 
the board. 
 Put learners into groups to identify the common nouns.  
 Have learners identify common nouns from paragraphs/passages. 
 
Have learners form sentences with the common nouns identified 
 
 
B4.5.3.1.3. Identify and use collective nouns to refer to a group 
of objects and people 
 
 Have learners read sentences containing collective nouns e.g. 
team, class, a swarm of bees, a troop of monkeys, a flock of 
sheep, a bunch of keys. 
 Explain to learners that collective nouns behave like singular 
nouns. Therefore, they are used with singular verbs. 
 Provide collective nouns and their groups for learners to 
identify. Let them form sentences using the collective nouns. 
 
B4.5.3.1.4. Identify and use abstract nouns to refer to concepts 
and ideas 
 
 Revise common and proper nouns. 
 Write sentences containing abstract nouns on the board. 
 Have learners take turns to read them and identify the nouns. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
61 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
CONT’D 
 
 Explain abstract nouns as names of things that cannot be seen, felt, 
nor touched. 
            e.g. air, beauty, peace 
 Have learners give examples of abstract nouns and write them on 
the board. 
 Have learners identify concrete and abstract nouns from 
paragraphs/passages. 
 Let them use these abstract nouns in their own sentences. 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
62 
Sub-Strand 4: Using Action Words 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.4.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of verbs 
in everyday language 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.5.4.1.1. Use the singular and plural subjects and the verb 
form that go with them 
 
 Revise the simple present form of verbs and their use to agree 
with the subject they follow. 
 Have learners do an activity: 
e. g. Write a letter to your friend telling him/her what you and 
your siblings do after school. 
Learners read their friendly letters in pairs. 
 Guide learners to correct the wrong use of subjects and their 
appropriate verb forms that go with them if any. e.g. we eats – we 
eat 
 Have learners do peer editing to identify and correct errors. 
 
B4.5.4.1.2. Demonstrate the use of simple past form in speech 
and in writing to express past conditions 
 
 Revise the simple past tense (both regular and irregular verbs). 
 Assign learners to do an activity e.g. let learners, in small groups, 
re-write the letters they wrote previously in the simple past tense 
(Refer to B4.5.4.1.1). 
 Let pairs of learners exchange their work and peer edit. 
B4.5.4.1.3. Use the present perfect form of verbs to relate past 
events to the present 
 
 Learners in pairs plan what they will do during the next weekend.  
 They put their plan into writing using modal auxiliaries. 
 Let two pairs come together to form bigger groups to edit their 
work one after the other. 
 Pairs of learners read their work to the class for discussion. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
63 
 
Sub-Strand 5: Using Qualifying Words – Adjectives 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.5.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of adjectives 
in speech and in writing 
 
B4.5.5.1.1. Use adjectives to make comparisons  
              e.g.  
 fast /slow    
 good/bad 
 fast/faster 
 slow/slower 
  
 Guide learners with several examples and situations to 
identify the comparative forms of adjectives in sentences, e.g.  
Ama is fast but Kofi is slow. 
 Have learners identify adjectives in a given passage. 
 Let learners write sentences using comparative and 
superlative forms of adjectives. 
 
B4.5.5.1.2. Differentiate between how the comparative and 
superlative adjective forms are used in sentences 
 
 Guide learners with examples to talk about their siblings 
using adjectives. 
 In pairs, learners write two to three sentences to describe 
their classmates using the three forms of adjectives. 
 Two pairs put their work together and do a comparison. Let 
them share their work with other groups. 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
64 
Sub-Strand 6:  Using Adverbs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.6.1: Understand and 
use  adverbs correctly in 
speech and in writing 
 
B4.5.6.1.1. Use adverbs to talk about  when and where the 
action of a verb took place 
 Guided with examples, let learners narrate events using adverbs 
to describe the place and time of occurrence. 
 Introduce drills to provide oral practice. 
 Learners in group go on a field trip/excursion to e.g. a tourist 
centre. 
 Let them write and present their stories to demonstrate their 
knowledge of adverbs of place and time. 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
Sub-Strand 7: Using Simple Prepositions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.7.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
prepositions in oral and 
written communication 
 
B4.5.7.1.1. Use prepositions to convey a variety of 
meanings:  
-        Direction,  e.g. up 
- Period of Time, e.g.  for 
- Purpose, e.g. to 
- Possession, of 
- Comparison e.g. taller than 
 Have learners describe the positions of classroom 
objects using such sentences. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
65 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.7.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
prepositions in oral and 
written communication 
CONT’D 
 
 
 Write sentences that are missing propositions on the board 
e.g. 
i. The boy is walking the road. 
ii. My auntie has stayed with us one week. 
iii. I am happy see you. 
iv. Show me a picture your pet. 
v. Kwaku is taller Ama. 
 Have learners tell what is wrong with the sentences. (They 
don’t make sense. There are missing words, etc.) Write examples 
of the target prepositions on the board: up, for, to, of, than. 
Put learners into groups and have them re-write the 
sentences correctly, using the given prepositions. Groups 
write their answers on the board and underline the words 
 Guide learners to discover the functions of these prepositions. 
  Have learners work in pairs to use the prepositions in 
sentences.  
               
 Direction= towards the mountain. 
 Time = at six o’clock. 
 Purpose = for, in order to. 
 Possession= for, to 
 Comparison= than. 
   Support or opposition = for you, against me. 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
66 
Sub-Strand 8: Conjunctions 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.8.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
conjunctions in speech 
and in writing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
B4.5.8.1.1. Identify and use conjunctions - and, but, or, 
nor - to link:  
- similar ideas  
- contrasting ideas  
- express alternatives 
-  
Note: Learners are to consolidate the knowledge of conjunctions 
acquired in Strand 3: Grammar Usage at Word and Phrase Levels. 
 
  Guide learners to give examples of sentences 
demonstrating their knowledge of conjunctions. 
e.g.  
i. Musa and Kuma are good friends. 
ii. Kwame is hard working but Abena is lazy. 
 
 Guide learners in groups to join sentences using 
coordinating conjunctions on a topic. 
      e. g. A visit to an interesting tourist site 
 Guide them to edit each other’s work by exchanging 
with other groups. 
 Let learners talk about the differences in their stories. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
67 
 
Sub-Strand 9: Using Simple, Compound and Complex Sentences 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.9.1:  Apply 
knowledge of 
grammatical rules to 
form words, phrases and 
sentences 
 
 
 
B4.5.9.1.1. Identify subjects and verbs in simple  
sentences 
 Give learners an extract from a comprehension passage.  
 Guide them to identify the simple sentences. Let them 
identify subjects and verbs in each sentence. 
 Let learners write an event they have participated in. 
 Learners edit their work to demonstrate their knowledge 
of subject and predicate. 
 
B4.5.9.1.2. Construct simple sentences correctly 
 Learners construct simple sentences. 
 Write some of the sentences on the board to guide the 
discussions on subjects and verbs. 
 Show a large poster of people doing various activities. 
 Assign learners to build a paragraph on the picture paying 
attention to subject and predicate. They use a line to 
divide each sentence into the subject and predicate. 
 The groups edit and publish the work. Each member 
keeps a copy. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
68 
Sub-Strand 10: Spelling 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.10.1: Spell words accurately 
 
 
 
 
B4.5.10.1.1. Use invented spelling to 
increase fluency and free writing 
 Let learners spell given words with 
invented spellings. Each group tries to 
write the correct spelling. The group to 
get the highest number of words spelt 
correctly is regarded as the Spelling 
Champion for the work. 
 Give learners the meanings of words to 
identify and spell the words. 
 Learners use the words they have spelt in 
sentences of their own. 
 Select registers of various subjects/topics 
(shopping, transportation, agriculture). 
 Guide learners to spell the appropriate 
vocabulary used in that context. 
 Let learners use the words in writing a 
short paragraph describing or narrating 
that activity (shopping, travelling by bus, 
making a farm, catching fish). 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
69 
STRAND 6: EXTENSIVE READING 
Sub-Strand 1: Building the Love and Culture of Reading 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.6.1.1:  Read widely 
for pleasure, personal 
development, and 
demonstrate 
independent reading 
and learning in the 
literary content areas 
B4.6.1.1.1. Read a variety of age-  and level appropriate 
books and present  a-two-paragraph summary of each 
book read 
 Guide learners to choose and read independently books 
of their choice during the library period. 
 Learners think-pair-share their stories with peers. 
 Ask each learner to write a-two-paragraph summary of 
the book read. 
 Invite individuals to present their work to the class for 
feedback. 
Reading skills 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
70 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC 5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
71 
BASIC 5 
STRAND 1: ORAL LANGUAGE 
Sub-Strand 1: Songs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.1.1: 
Demonstrate 
understanding of 
a variety of  
songs  
 
 
B5.1.1.1.1. Explain the central messages in songs 
 
 Have learners sing some familiar patriotic songs. 
 Have learners listen to you sing a selected song. 
 Guide learners to sing lines of the song with appropriate stress and 
rhythm.    
 Let them sing individually and in groups. 
 Using questions discuss the central message of the target song: who 
composed this song? What is the song telling us? 
 Invite individuals to explain the central message(s) of the song.  
 
B5.1.1.1.2. Relate values in songs to real life experiences 
 
 Have learners sing familiar songs as in the previous lesson.  
 Lead learners to discuss the song and have them bring out the meaning.  
 In groups, learners discuss the values in the song, e.g. truthfulness, 
patience, etc. and relate the values to real life situations. 
 Have groups share their ideas with the class in the form of presentations. 
 Write salient responses on chalkboard. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation/ 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
72 
 
Sub-Strand 3: Poems 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.3.1: Appreciate 
poems and other pieces of 
literary materials 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.1.3.1.1. Respond to poems by discussing their central 
messages and expressing own opinion 
 
 Ask learners to recite a poem of their choice with actions. 
 Choose a poem appropriate for the grade level.  
 Recite and act on the poem as learners listen attentively to you 
and observe.  
 Allow some individual learners to recite as others listen. 
 Lead learners to recite lines of the poem with correct stress, 
clapping and tapping out the rhythm.  
 
B5.1.3.1.2. Relate values in poems to day-to-day life 
 
 Ask learners to recite some poems already learnt. Write out the 
new poem on the board. Teach the meaning and pronunciation 
of the key words in context. 
 Lead learners to read the poem line by line and discuss with 
them the meaning of the whole poem. 
 Recite the poem with pupils line by line, clapping and tapping out 
the rhythm. 
 Together with learners identify and discuss some values in the 
poem, e.g. patience, love, patriotism etc. 
 Have learners relate the values to real life situations and 
experiences. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
73 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.3.1: Appreciate 
poems and other pieces 
of literary materials  
CONT’D 
 
 
B5.1.3.1.3. Compose six-line poems.  
 
 Have learners recite a poem of their choice individually and in 
groups. 
 Put learners into groups and ask them to write out some lines of 
recited poems. 
 Assign learners to create or write some meaningful lines similar 
to those in the poem of their choice.  
 Guide learners to arrange their formulated lines together to 
compose a poem of six lines.    
 Have each group recite their poem while others listen. 
 Ask the class to identify the values in the poems as they listen to 
recitations. 
Communication and Collaboration  
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
74 
SUB –STRAND 4: STORY TELLING 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.4.1: Respond to 
stories 
 
B5.1.4.1.1. Demonstrate understanding of lessons in stories by 
making relevant comments 
 
 Tell a story using the appropriate procedure or stages. With 
examples, guide learners to identify the beginning, middle and 
ending.  
 Invite learners to retell story sequentially  
 
Story Element: What are the key details 
about this story? 
Who is the main character?  
What is the setting?  
What event(s) happened at 
the beginning of the story? 
 
What event(s) happened at 
the middle of the story? 
 
What event(s) happened at 
the end of the story? 
 
 
 Have learners take turns to comment on the story. 
 
B5.1.4.1.2. Tell stories which are parallel to stories heard or 
read 
 Use an example to explain a parallel poem or story. 
 Lead the class to write a story parallel to a familiar story. 
 Present another short story on the board. 
 Elicit and discuss areas that can be changed or replaced to create 
a parallel story.  
Assign groups to write and present stories parallel to that on the 
board. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
75 
Sub-Strand 5: Dramatization and Role Play 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.5.1: Appreciate 
pieces of literary 
materials through 
dramatisation 
B5.1.5.1.1. Use costume to dramatize or role-play parts/whole 
of stories 
 Lead learners to select a familiar story for dramatisation. 
 Ask questions to review the story. 
 Assign groups to prepare (share roles, select costume and 
rehearse) and dramatise/role-play the story using improvised 
lines. 
 Invite groups to perform for the class to critique their 
performances. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
B5.1.5.2: Appreciate key  
issues in stories/sketches 
B5.1.5.2.1. Interpret  moral values in plays/stories 
 Select stories or plays recently watched or read by learners. 
 Use questions to guide learners to identify the moral values (e. g. 
truthfulness, perseverance, etc.) in the story/play. 
  Put learners in groups to interpret the moral values identified 
and share their interpretation with the class. 
 Have learners discuss how to apply those values to day-to-day 
living. 
 
B5.1.5.2.2. Develop sketches from stories read or heard 
 Through discussion, guide learners to identify the parts in stories 
read. 
 Invite some learners to retell parts of a story read or heard. 
 Discuss the story with learners.  
 Use the activity to guide learners in groups to develop a sketch 
from the story. 
 Have learners read out their sketches to the class for 
comments. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Critical thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Creativity and Innovation 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
76 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.5.2: Appreciate key  
issues in stories/sketches 
CONT’D 
 
B5.1.5.2.3. Analyse the actions of characters in sketches 
 Sing songs that accompany story telling with learners.  
 Choose familiar stories from learners’ background. 
 Put learners into groups. Revise the previous activity on writing 
short sketches. Learners sketch a story told.  
 Through questions guide learners to identify and analyse 
characters and their actions in their sketches. 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
77 
Sub-Strand 6: Conversation - Talking about Oneself, Family, People, Customs,  
Social/Cultural Values and Manners 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.6.1: Use certain 
culturally acceptable 
language for 
communication 
 
B5.1.6.1.1. Describe/talk about names of regions/places in the 
country as well as personalities in the community, expressing 
ideas and feelings clearly 
 
Note: Items in this indicator should be treated in separate lessons. 
The procedure below may be useful. 
 
 Discuss some important personalities in the community,  
 Ask pupils to mention the regions in the country.  
 In groups, have learners talk about important places in in each 
region. 
 Have groups read their findings to the class. 
 Encourage the class to ask questions for clarification of ideas 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
B5.1.6.2: Demonstrate 
positive listening and 
viewing attitudes and 
behaviour by showing 
attentiveness and 
understanding 
B5.1.6.2.1. Maintain appropriate posture and facial expression 
 
 Discuss with learners the importance of appropriate posture 
and facial expression in conversation. 
 Learners in groups choose a theme and engage in conversation 
maintaining appropriate posture and facial expressions. 
Learners listen and observe the speaker’s use of these skills and 
later critique to help them acquire or improve them. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
78 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.6.2: Demonstrate 
positive listening and 
viewing attitudes and 
behaviour by showing 
attentiveness and 
understanding 
B5.1.6.2.2. Listen and view for the entire duration of text, 
speech, presentation, video etc. 
 
 Play an audio video on your phone or laptop and let learners 
listen carefully. Set a task to guide them to focus on the 
activity. 
 Discuss what they saw and heard. Learners in their groups 
describe what they saw and heard and do a presentation. 
 Select a real life scenario e.g. head teacher addressing the 
school after winning the sports competition. Learners in 
groups organise their speech; elect a representative to read 
while others listen. 
 
B5.1.6.3.1. Engage in collaborative conversation on topics 
such as social issues, values and manners with adults 
 
 Show the video of a talk show or introduce a talk show by 
drawing on learners background knowledge of such activities 
on TV.  
 Identify an interesting topic e.g. “Children should not 
WhatsApp”. Initiate a conversation using questions. Learners 
take turns to contribute to the conversation. 
 Put learners in groups and let them choose a topic for 
conversation. Go round to ensure learners take turns, use 
facial expressions appropriately and maintain eye contact when 
in conversation. 
 Put learners in groups to identify and discuss social values (e. g. 
honesty), what they are and behaviours that portray these 
values. 
Digital Literacy 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
79 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.6.2: Demonstrate 
positive listening and 
viewing attitudes and 
behaviour by showing 
attentiveness and 
understanding   
CONT’D 
 
 
B5.1.6.3: Use knowledge 
of language and 
communicative skills to 
participate in 
conversation 
 
 
 
 They should identify people they know who have exhibited 
these values and how they showed these values 
 Have each group present their work to the class. Encourage the 
class to ask questions and contribute to the presentation. 
 
Repeat the procedure to help learners to talk about manners. 
 
B5.1.6.3.2. Demonstrate turn taking in conversation in 
different topics and follow agreed- upon rules for conversation, 
e.g. listening to others, speaking one at a time. 
 Through discussion, guide learners to identify some events that 
happened in the day or recently 
 Invite some individual learners to discuss with the class some 
experiences. 
 e.g. The learner was late and had to help somebody on the way 
to school. 
 Have a pair of learners converse on a given topic (e.g. a football 
match) as others watch. 
  Learners in pairs then converse, talking about different topics 
after the example presented.. 
 Guide the use of appropriate vocabulary by showing vocabulary 
cards and indirectly dropping hints of a correct word. 
 Encourage learners to take turns in the activity. 
e.g. What did you just say? Say that again. Can you repeat what 
you said, sorry, excuse me. 
Learners demonstrate the use of this in pairs in front of the class. 
Digital Literacy 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
80 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.6.3: Use knowledge 
of language and 
communicative skills to 
participate in 
conversation 
CONT’D 
B5.1.6.3.3. Respond to questions to give further clarification 
of an opinion 
 Revise the activity on the talk show. Learners give examples of 
some vocabulary learnt. 
 Together with learners, choose a topic and initiate a 
conversation. Encourage learners to ask questions for 
clarification, and use appropriate expressions. 
 Put pupils into groups. Have each group choose a theme and 
initiate a conversation on their theme. Have the others listen 
and ask questions. 
 Have the group respond to the questions to give further 
clarifications 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
81 
Sub-Strand 7: Listening Comprehension 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.7.1: Use 
appropriate skills and 
strategies to process 
meaning from texts 
B5.1.7.1.1. Employ the Think-Aloud strategy to convey 
meaning from level- appropriate texts. 
 Have learners listen to an audio text or a teacher-read text. 
 Model Think-Aloud strategy to make meaning from the text. 
 Have learners practise the Think-Aloud strategy to construct 
meaning. 
 
B5.1.7.1.2. Make connections with events in drama 
 Have learners listen to an audio drama or watch a video. 
 Guide learners to identify the sequence of events in the story, 
i.e. events at the beginning, middle and ending. 
 Ask relevant questions to guide learners to relate the events in 
the drama to their lives. 
  
B5.1.7.1.3. Relate to lessons in stories 
 Assist learners to revise the sequence of a story familiar to 
them. 
 Have learners identify the characters in the story and the roles 
the characters played in the story or text. 
 Learners again identify the setting of the story.  
 Learners identify the moral lessons from the story. 
 Help them discuss and relate the moral lessons to their lives 
using an example to illustrate that. 
 Read a short story to learners and in groups, have them relate 
to the lessons in the story by repeating the above activities. 
 
Cultural Identity 
and Global Citizenship 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
82 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.7.1: Use 
appropriate skills and 
strategies to process 
meaning from texts 
CONT’D 
 
B5.1.7.1.4. Use background knowledge to understand and build 
new knowledge while listening to drama 
 Have learners listen to a drama. 
 Learners in groups identify, discuss and relate the plot of the 
drama to a familiar text.  
 Have learners listen to the drama a second time. 
 In groups, learners share what they have learnt in the text. 
  
B5.1.7.1.5. Ask relevant questions to expand comprehension of 
details of texts 
 Through discussion, learners identify some interesting stories or 
texts they have heard or read. 
 Assist learners to talk about the content of the stories/texts 
after re-telling the story. 
Encourage learners to ask relevant questions to expand their 
comprehension of the details of the text. 
 
B5.1.7.1.6. Distinguish between causes and effects of events in a 
story 
 Select an appropriate story to be read in class. 
 Have learners read the story and re-tell it to the class. 
 Work together with learners to identify the events in the story 
and link them sequentially by identifying cause and effect. 
 Learners in their groups choose stories and identify the causes 
and effects of events. Let learners present their work as the rest 
listen to them. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cultural Identity 
and Global Citizenship 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
Communication and Collaboration 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
83 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.7.1: Use 
appropriate skills and 
strategies to process 
meaning from texts 
CONT’D 
B5.1.7.1.7. Draw conclusions from main ideas, key details and 
specific examples from texts 
 
 Revise the lessons on identification of cause and effect using 
Think-Pair-Share.  
 Select an interesting story to guide the learners do this exercise. 
 Build on this activity by working together with learners to 
identify specific examples to help bring out main ideas and the 
key details. With this example, guide learners to draw 
conclusions. 
 
Cultural Identity 
and Global Citizenship 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
84 
Strand 1: Oral Language 
Sub-Strand 8: Asking and Answering Questions/ Question Tags 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.8.1: Demonstrate 
understanding in asking 
and answering questions 
correctly 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.1.8.2: Identify and use 
question tags correctly in 
speech 
 
B5.1.8.1.1. Use the various forms of ‘do’, ‘be’, ‘have’, 
appropriately in questions and responses 
 Revise Wh and Yes/No questions by having learners 
respond to several of such questions. 
 Use the various forms of ‘do’ to construct sentences as 
learners listen to you. e. g. Do you like lots of pepper?  Does 
he teach here? Did we sleep there?  
 Answer each question yourself. 
  Ask the questions again and have learners give the answer. 
  In pairs, learners ask questions for their partners to answer. 
  Repeat the procedure to introduce the various forms of ‘be’ 
(is, am, are etc.) and ‘have’ (has, have, had).  
  
B5.1.8.2.1. Use positive tags, negative tags and auxiliaries in 
speech 
 Play a recorded dialogue containing positive tags or get two 
learners to engage in a dialogue prepared by the teacher 
containing positive tags. 
 Learners listen and in pairs, use positive tags in dialogues. Do 
the same with negative tags. Go through the same 
procedure to get learners to use the tags in speech. 
(Explain that question tags are short questions that follow 
statements). 
 Together with learners, discuss the formation of tags by 
listening to and practising using them in speech.   
       e.g. The bad boys aren’t in school today, are they? 
 
In a Question and Answer Drill, pairs of learners ask and answer 
questions round the class. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Literacy 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
85 
Sub-Strand 9: Giving and Following Commands/ Instructions/Directions 
and Making and Responding to Requests 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.9.1: Use verbs in 
commands, instructions, 
requests and directions 
appropriately in speech 
CONT’D 
 
B5.1.9.1.1. Give and respond to commands, instructions; give and 
follow directions with clear landmarks 
 
 Revise the concept of giving commands and making requests   
 In pairs, have learners role-play giving and obeying or following 
commands/instructions. 
 Model giving simple directions to places in the school and important 
places in the community or environment. 
 Provide situations for learners to practise giving directions. E.g. 
 
Showing direction 
    e.g.   
"A stranger meets you at the school gate. Direct him or her to the 
chief's palace, Central Mosque etc. 
 Learners work in groups to give directions. 
 
B5.1.9.1.2. Make and respond to polite requests for help from 
familiar adults 
 Revise how to make requests by giving examples. 
 In a discussion, help learners to identify the need to use ‘please’ 
when making simple requests. Through demonstration, guide learners to 
make polite requests in the classroom.   
            e.g.  
i. Please sir/madam, may I go out? 
ii. Yes, you may. 
 Invite learners to the front in pairs to dramatise/role-play 
situations/scenes where they make requests and respond to them. 
Provide and teach vocabulary and expressions to guide them make 
requests and respond to them. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
86 
Strand 1: Oral Language 
Sub-Strand 10: Presentation 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.10.1: Demonstrate 
knowledge of spoken 
grammar and register 
 
B5.1.10.1.1. Demonstrate awareness of the features of spoken 
language, e.g. use of discourse markers- well, also, finally 
 
 Revise important features of spoken language such as use of 
contractions and ellipsis.  
 Help learners to use contractions and ellipsis in speech. 
       e.g. 
      1.  Contraction:  
i. Kofi cannot come today. 
ii. Kofi can’t come today. 
      2. Ellipis: 
                     A: When will you come? 
                     B: Tomorrow 
 
B5.1.10.1.2. Demonstrate awareness of the differences between 
spoken and written forms of language, e.g. formal and informal 
register                                                                                                                                                        
 Revise some differences between spoken and written forms of 
language, e.g. simplicity in spoken sentences and complexity of 
written sentences. 
e.g. written: I have not gone there. 
        spoken: I haven’t gone there.  
 Demonstrate simplicity of spoken language by giving short and 
simple speeches on a topic. 
 e.g. introduction of a chairman. 
 Encourage learners to give short and simple speeches on chosen 
topics, e.g. My Favourite Meal 
 
Commitment and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commitment and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
87 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.10.1: Demonstrate 
knowledge of spoken 
grammar and register 
 
B5.1.10.1.3. Demonstrate awareness of how meaning is 
conveyed through appropriate pace, stress, tone – through 
reciting poems. 
 Perform a familiar poem as learners listen and observe. 
 Have learners discuss the recital with focus on intonation, stress 
and rhythm. 
 Perform it again and have the class or groups do same. 
 Individuals, pairs and groups now choose and perform their 
favourite poems. 
 Have the class critique each effort. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
B5.1.10.2: Demonstrate 
the ability to 
communicate with 
accurate pronunciation 
and appropriate 
intonation 
 
B5.1.10.2.1. Speak audibly and coherently, using the 
appropriate voice qualities (pace, tone etc.) 
 Have learners listen to a conversation or speech in which the 
speaker speaks fluently and clearly and another audio where the 
speech is neither clear nor fluent. 
 Discuss the differences and ask learners to tell the importance of 
clear speech. 
 Create situations for learners to engage in dialogue (a pair at a 
time) or speech delivery. 
 Encourage them to   maintain a good pace and tone.  
 Invite comments from the class after each delivery. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
88 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.10.2: 
Demonstrate the ability 
to communicate with 
accurate pronunciation 
and appropriate 
intonation (cont.) 
 
B5.1.10.2.2. Read aloud clearly, at a good pace and with 
expression 
 Have learners listen to audio recordings of speeches or listen to 
news read in English.  
 Learners listen to the speech in meaningful bits to guide them 
identify appropriate expressions as well as identify what a good 
pace is. 
 Use further samples to show that good speeches are presented 
with the appropriate expression and at a good pace. 
 In groups learners pick topics for their speeches. They prepare 
and deliver in turns.  Let them deliver the speeches in about five 
(5) minutes each. 
 Have the class discuss the pace and use of appropriate 
expressions. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
 
B5.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information and 
ideas for a variety of 
purposes  
 
B5.1.10.3.1. Present information about personal experiences 
 Model presenting a speech on a topic or have them listen to a 
recording of someone's personal experience. Use the example 
to guide learners to identify the purpose and audience of speech. 
 Discuss the importance of purpose and audience in speech. 
 Put learners in groups to plan a parallel speech and present to 
the class. Each group should select a purpose and an 
audience for their speech. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Cultural identity and Global 
citizenship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
89 
 CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
 
B5.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information and 
ideas for a variety of 
purposes  
 
B5.1.10.3.2. Draw on prior knowledge to identify 
organisational structure of speech 
 Have learners listen to a speech and give the written text to 
them to read taking note of the features. 
 Discuss the structure of a model speech with learners:      
              e.g.  
i. Heading 
ii. Vocative Address 
iii. Introduction 
iv. Body 
 In groups have pupils write and present a parallel speech. Have 
the class to critique each group’s work based on the discussed 
structures.  
 
B5.1.10.3.3. Gather and select facts and ideas from one or 
multiple print and/ non-print sources, appropriate to the 
purpose, audience, context and culture 
 Review the organizational structure of speech with pupils by 
giving a short speech and asking them to identify the various 
structures 
 Provide sample speeches for discussion to help learners 
generate ideas for their speeches. 
 Use the internet to guide the learners to download important 
speeches.   
 Together with learners discuss the organizational structure of 
the speeches. 
 Have learners choose and write speeches. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Creativity and Innovations 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
Digital literacy 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
90 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information and 
ideas for a variety of 
purposes  
 
B5.1.10.3.4. Support ideas and points of view by integrating 
selected visual and/ audio resources, verbal and non-verbal 
cues (e.g. gestures, facial expressions)  
 Through discussion, guide learners to select facts and ideas 
from one or more sources such as print sources and non-
print sources (e.g. resource person) appropriate to the 
purpose, audience, context and culture. 
 Encourage learners to ask questions for clarity 
 
B5.1.10.3.5. Use discourse markers to signpost stages in a 
presentation (e.g. “For the next part”, “For example”, “In 
summary”) 
 Select a sample written speech and through discussion help 
learners to identify discourse markers to signpost stages in a 
presentation. 
e.g. “Let us look at,”  Also, “ To sum up,” “Finally” 
 Learners write and use the appropriate words in both formal 
and informal situations. 
 
B5.1.10.3.6 Elaborate on points using concrete examples 
 Through model discussion help learners to elaborate on their 
points and substantiate them through the use of details, 
concrete examples, experiences and feelings 
 Have learners present their works to the hearing of others. 
 Encourage the class to make input in one another’s work. 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
citizenship 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
91 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information 
and ideas for a variety 
of purposes  
CONT’D 
B5.1.10.3.7 Speak with confidence before different audiences 
and maintain appropriate posture  
 Through role play and frequent practice in presentation, build 
confidence in learners to enable them stand before different 
audiences. 
 Let them demonstrate various postures, maintain eye contact 
and use verbal and non-verbal signs to convey meaning.  
Let them practice these in pairs and groups. 
 
STRAND 2: READING 
Sub-Strand 2: Phonics 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.2.1: Connect 
sounds to letters; and 
blend letters/syllables in 
order to read and write 
 
 
B5.2.2.1.1. Apply common phonic generalisations (e.g. hard 
and soft 'c' and 'g') when reading continuous texts.  
            e.g.  
           'c'  as in country  and cell 
           'g' as in gain and age 
 Review the hard form of the sound, e.g. ‘c’ as in cut; ‘g’ as in 
get 
 Introduce the soft form using lots of examples, e.g. ‘c’ as in 
centre, cent, circle; ‘g’ as in gent, gin, etc. 
 In groups, encourage learners to come out with words in 
which the sounds occur.   
 Have each group read their words to the class and then 
publish it on the walls of the classroom for learners to go 
round to read.  
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and Leadership 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
92 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.2.1: Connect 
sounds to letters; and 
blend letters/syllables in 
order to read and write 
CONT’D 
B5.2.2.1.2. Read two syllable words with suffixes and "r" 
controlled words (or, er, ar , ur) when reading continuous 
texts. 
 Introduce learners to the “r” controlled words. 
e.g.  
or as in lord, ford 
er as in her, fern, term, herb 
ar as in arm, car, park 
ur as in burn, turn, purse 
 Invite learners to give their examples. 
 Put learners into groups and assign each group sounds. Using 
dictionary and the internet, have members of each group 
search for words that contain the sound.  
 Have each group read their words to the class. 
Get learners to read two syllable words that contain suffixes and ‘r’ 
controlled words (e.g. return) in sentences. 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
93 
 
Sub-Strand 3: Word Families: Minimal Pairs and Common Digraphs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.3.1: Identify 
minimal pairs and 
common digraphs 
B5.2.3.1.1.Use common minimal pairs to decode words. e.g. –
sash, wash 
 Give examples of minimal pairs, e.g. watch, catch 
 In groups let learners come up with more examples 
 Select two paragraphs from the reading passage and let 
learners identify specific spelling patterns  
e.g. sh- fish, dish, sash, wash 
 th – both, tooth 
 Drill pronunciation of words 
 Learners read the words containing minimal pairs, e.g. church, 
search, perch, fetch 
 Work together with learners to write simple sentences with 
the minimal pairs. 
 Learners in pairs identify more words from reading passages 
and make a list on a chart. 
             Let each pair read the words. 
 
B5.2.3.1.2. Use words with digraphs to make meaningful 
sentences 
 Revise the activity in B5.2.3.1.1 and show the chart containing 
words. Let learners think-pair-share and select a paragraph 
with words containing digraphs e.g. wh, th, both at initial and 
end positions e.g. that, those, these, with, sixth, teeth. 
 Put learners into groups. Let them identify and read words 
containing digraphs and use them in sentences. 
 The group that produces ten words and uses them in 
sentences correctly is the winner. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
94 
Sub-strand 4: Diphthongs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.4.1: Identify and use 
diphthongs to decode 
 
B5.2.4.1.1.Use closing diphthongs, e.g.  /aƱ/, /eƱ/to make meaningful 
sentences 
 
 Revise the activity on minimal pairs words. Let learners pick partners, 
think-pair-share. Learners use their rhyming words in meaningful 
sentences. 
 Introduce words that contain the target diphthongs, one at a time, by 
writing examples on the board e.g.  
/eƱ/ -   go, no, boat, load etc. 
/aƱ/ - how, fowl etc. 
Note: Do not write the symbols of the sounds 
 Learners read and identify the common sound in the words. In groups 
learners make a list of words containing diphthongs and use some in 
sentences e.g. she says today is pay day.  
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Reading and writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
95 
Sub-Strand 5: Blends and Consonant  Clusters 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.5.1: Identify and use 
consonant blends and 
clusters in reading 
 
 
B5.2.5.1.1.Orally produce two-syllable words by blending sounds 
(phonemes), including consonant blends                                                                                                                       
 Learners individually make meaningful sentences with words 
containing diphthongs. Every correct sentence is recorded for the 
group the individual belongs to. 
 Introduce two syllable words with consonant blends.  
 Model the pronunciation and have learners say it after you. 
 Teacher and learners select a reading text to guide the class to 
identify words containing consonant blends.  
 List words on the board and drill learners in their pronunciation 
 Learners read sentences and pick out the  two-syllable  words 
with consonant blends. 
  e.g. dr-hundred, dr-drumstick, bl-problem, nd-handcuff 
 
 
B5.2.5.1.2.Use the spelling-sound correspondences for common 
consonant digraphs.  
 Revise digraphs. Have a simple presentation of digraphs by writing 
examples of words that begin or end with them on the board. 
 Have learners read the words and identify the letters at the 
beginning and the end.  
e.g. taught , watch, splash, photographs.  
 Together with learners use the internet to identify words 
containing specific digraphs. 
 Learners write examples of words, find their meanings and use 
them in sentences. 
E.g. lt- belt, fr- fresh, pl- play 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Reading  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital literacy 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
96 
 
Sub-strand 6: Vocabulary 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.6.1: Understand 
word meanings and 
usages 
 
B5.2.6.1.1.Use level-appropriate content words (nouns, verbs, 
adjectives and adverbs),  and function words (e.g. prepositions) 
appropriately in spoken and written communication 
 Explain to learners that function words glue pieces of sentences 
together into long patterns. In other words they express a 
grammatical or structural relationship with other words in a 
sentence. 
  Examples of function words are determiners, conjunctions, 
prepositions, auxiliary verbs, modals etc. 
 Content words are words with specific meanings such as nouns, 
adjectives, adverbs and main verb.   
      e.g. The sly brown fox jumped over the lazy dog. 
 
 In groups learners identify and work out the meanings of content 
words in texts read. 
 Have them use these words in sentences. 
 
B5.2.6.1.2.Use the following terms:  synonym, antonym, pre-fix, 
suffix, phrasal verb etc. in spoken and written expressions. 
 Choose a text to guide learners identify synonyms, antonyms, idioms 
or phrasal verbs etc. 
 Create a scenario where learners can use idioms, antonyms, 
prefixes, suffixes and phrasal verbs, synonyms, etc. in meaningful 
sentences in written and spoken languages. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Listening and Speaking  
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
97 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.6.2: Build 
vocabulary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.2.6.3: Demonstrate a 
rich vocabulary that 
supports the 
development of 
listening, reading, 
speaking, writing and 
presentation skills 
B5.2.6.2.1.Develop a rich vocabulary stock through extensive 
reading of age-appropriate texts, using the dictionary or online 
resources to look up meanings of words etc. 
 
 Choose and read an age appropriate story to the class. 
 Have learners talk about the story. 
 Let them Identify unfamiliar vocabulary and find their meanings in 
context. 
 Have learners use the Build My Vocab App on the internet to help 
build the most globally used language to help develop their 
vocabulary. 
 Guide learners to choose books from the school library or 
distribute supplementary readers to them. 
 Introduce a simple vocabulary book made by teacher to guide the 
learners build their vocabulary. 
 Read to learners to encourage them read extensively. Encourage 
individual learners to read their selected story books to the class.  
B5.2.6.3.1.Deduce meaning of words from the word class they 
belong to and how they relate to one another (synonyms and 
antonyms). 
 
 Teach meaning of keywords in a text by using them in sentences.  
 In groups of six have learners bring out the contextual meaning of 
the words using synonyms and antonym.   
 Have learners use these words in their own sentences. 
 Have them present their work to the class for feedback. 
 Have learners play vocabulary games, e.g. The Synonym/Antonym 
Tree game 
 
Digital Literacy 
Listening and Speaking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reading and Writing 
Communication and Collaboration 
Listening and Speaking 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
98 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.6.4: Use words 
appropriately for 
purpose, audience, 
context and culture 
 
B5.2.6.4.1.Recognise how words are formed through acronyms 
(WHO) and clipping (telephone-phone). 
 
 Have learners revise building vocabulary through affixes. 
e.g. micro -microscope 
                    in -      insert 
                    con-    connect 
                     re-       return 
 Learners should find meaning to these affixes and write more 
examples of affixes. Play a game where learners identify affixes in 
words. The group with the highest number of words is declared 
the winner.  
 Introduce acronyms and clipping.  
e.g.: 
acronyms -  WHO = World Health Organisation 
 clipping - telephone = phone 
 Put learners into groups and have them research on acronyms 
and clipping, using dictionaries or online resources, to build 
more vocabulary 
 
B5.2.6.4.2.Recognise the playful use of words in spoken and 
written language (jokes, riddles, puns  etc.) 
 
 Demonstrate the playful use of words (jokes, riddles etc.) 
e.g. Riddle, riddle. I am something. I have four legs and a top. People 
write or eat on me. What am I? 
 Have learners use appropriate language in jokes, riddles etc. 
 Make them understand that these are ways in which language 
could also be used.   
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Digital Literacy 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
99 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.6.4: Use words 
appropriately for 
purpose, audience, 
context and culture 
CONT’D 
B5.2.6.4.3.Use words suitable for purpose, audience, context 
and culture in relation to: type of texts 
(expository/explanatory, persuasive language, argumentative), 
medium (spoken/written), register (formal/informal) etc. 
 
 Demonstrate the use of the key elements in writing. E.g. 
purpose, audience, setting, characters etc. 
 Have learners to role-play a simple story to bring out the 
importance of these elements and their usage. 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
Strand 2: Reading 
Sub-Strand 7: Comprehension 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.7.1: Process and 
comprehend level 
appropriate texts 
 
B5.2.7.1.1.Construct meaning from text read 
 
 Choose different texts for learners to make meaning from using 
the different strategies they are familiar with: 
 Use of prior knowledge/experience.   
 Making predictions  
 Contextual meaning of vocabulary to connect with the other 
words to make meaning. 
  
B5.2.7.1.2. Note and recall main ideas in a sequence 
 
 Using SQ3R guide learners to present facts and ideas in a sequential 
order.  
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
100 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.7.1: Process and 
comprehend level 
appropriate texts 
CONT’D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.2.7.1.3. Scan texts for details 
 Guide learners to skim and scan texts for details.   
 Have learners skim/scan a text in a short period/time frame and write 
down their ideas.   
 Discuss the answers together as a class. 
 
B5.2.7.1.4. Read level-appropriate texts silently and closely for 
comprehension. 
 
 Revise the Before Reading, During Reading and After Reading 
strategies introduced to learners. 
 Provide appropriate texts and ensure that the strategies are 
used. 
 
B5.2.7.2.1. Respond to a text with simple judgment  
 Use appropriate questions to guide learners read, identify and 
present points of view in a text 
 Learners create a mental image from the text read visualizing/ 
bringing the text to life by engaging the imagination and using all 
the senses e.g. use questions to guide them do this activity. Can 
you describe pictures or images you made in your head when 
you read the text? 
 Through relevant questions, have learners respond to the text 
with simple judgment.  Learners should present their points in 
written or oral form. 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and  
Collaboration 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
101 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.7.2: Apply critical 
reading, implied 
meaning, higher order 
thinking, judgment and 
evaluation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.2.7.3: Demonstrate 
an understanding of 
the use of words and 
phrases as used in a 
text. 
 
B5.2.7.2.2. Relate two or more ideas in a text  
 Through relevant questions, have learners make personal 
 connections with a text read. 
              e.g. Does the message in this passage remind you  
             of something? 
             Answer:  This story reminds me of a holiday I spent  
              with my grandfather. 
 Have learners relate two or more ideas within the text or 
from different texts. 
 
B5.2.7.2.3. Demonstrate awareness of the structure of 
texts (e.g. introduction, body, conclusion) 
 Guide learners with questions to identify the main parts of 
a story.  e.g. introduction, body and conclusion. 
 Have learners use connectives to summarise each part of 
the text and use these to make a full summary. 
 
B5.2.7.3.1. Use knowledge of prefixes and suffixes to read 
and interpret unfamiliar words. 
e.g. mis – misunderstanding 
 Revise affixes briefly and have learners identify them in 
words. 
 Have learners use words in their own sentences 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reading and Writing 
Critical Thinking 
Listening and Speaking 
 
 
 
Listening and Speaking 
Reading and Writing  
 
Reading and Writing 
Personal Development 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
102 
 
Sub-Strand 8: Silent Reading 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.8.1: Construct 
meaning from texts 
read 
 
B5.2.8.1.1. Infer meaning from level-appropriate texts 
 
 Have learners read silently. Let them stop and think about 
something different from the text. This is to make them know 
what to do when meaning is disrupted. 
 Have them read silently for the meaning from the text. 
 
B5.2.8.1.2. Find the meaning of words as used in context 
 
 Use examples to show that words have different meanings. 
 Have a vocabulary lesson to help learners find meaning of words 
in a text. 
 Have learners use Think-Pair-Share to discuss their meaning 
together. 
 
B5.2.8.1.3. Answer questions based on the passage read 
 
 Learners pose and answer questions that clarify meaning and 
promote deeper understanding of a text. 
 Questions can be generated by the learner, a peer or an adult. 
              e.g.  
i. Why did the character do nothing? 
ii. How did it make them feel? 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
Communication and collaboration  
 
Personal Development 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
103 
Sub-Strand 9: Fluency 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.9.1: Read fluently 
to enhance 
comprehension 
 
B5.2.9.1.1. Read grade- level texts with good speed and accuracy 
 
 Use the three stage approach to a comprehension lesson and 
have learners prepare and read the text with purpose and 
understanding.   
 Use different strategies to assist learners to come up with 
meaning of a text ,e.g.  The Herring Bone, KWL etc. 
 
B5.2.9.1.2. Use context to confirm or self-correction strategies 
to confirm understanding of level appropriate texts 
 
 Have learners read the grade appropriate texts paying attention 
to punctuation marks, words, sentences and paragraphs. 
 Provide questions that will guide learners in understanding the 
passage e.g. What word connects paragraphs one and two? 
 Learners use correction strategy to help them make meaning 
from the text as they read. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
104 
 
 
Sub-Strand 10: Summarising 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.10.1: Read and 
summarise passages 
read 
 
B5.2.10.1.1. Summarise level-appropriate texts/passages orally 
 
 Learners identify the most important ideas in texts/passages 
read and restate them in their own words. 
               e.g.  
i. Can you retell the story? 
ii. Who are the main characters?  
iii. What is the setting?  
iv. What are the main events? (use herringbone or story map 
as strategies) 
 
B5.2.10.1.2. Write a short summary of a level-appropriate 
text/passage read 
 
 Have learners work in groups to write a summary of a 
text/passage read taking note of the main ideas. 
 Let learners present their write-up for discussion and feedback 
from the class and teacher.  
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development  
 
 
Reading, Listening and Speaking 
 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
Reading and Speaking 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
105 
 
Strand 3: Grammar and Usage at Word and Phrase Levels 
Sub-Strand 1: Nouns   
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
 
B5.3.1.1.1. Identify and use nouns or noun phrases to refer 
to quantities or units. 
 
 Revise nouns briefly. 
 Introduce quantities and units in context.  
 e.g.: 
 Please, give me a piece of paper. 
 I have a pair of trousers. 
 Have learners identify more examples of these in text and 
use them in sentences. 
 Learners make up their own noun phrases and use them in 
sentences. 
 
B5.3.1.1.2. Identify and use:  
- proper nouns - refer to festivals;  
- Count/non-count 
 Singular 
 Plural (regular, irregular) 
 plural without plural marker 
  
 Proper nouns  
 Introduce the concept in context. 
              e.g.  Christmas is coming. 
         The people of Ga celebrate Homowo.  
- In pairs have learners give more examples of 
festivals and write them as proper nouns. 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
Listening and Speaking  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development  
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
106 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
 
 Count and non-count nouns. 
 
 Revise the concept of proper nouns and common nouns.  
(Proper nouns refer to particular nouns such as names of 
people, places, mountains, etc.) 
 Elicit examples from learners. 
 Briefly discuss what common nouns are giving and 
eliciting several examples. 
 Use several examples to explain and exemplify count and 
non-count nouns and provide activities for practice. 
 
Singular and Plural (regular, irregular) nouns 
 
 Introduce singular and plural nouns in context.  
e.g. I need a table. Can you give me one of these tables? 
       This child looks sick, but those children look healthy.  
 
 Have learners read the sentences and observe the 
underlined words. 
 Show pictures of objects/people to help learners to 
identify regular and irregular nouns e.g. picture of a child, 
and a picture of children. 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development  
 
 
 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
107 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
CONT’D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
 
 Guide learners to discover the difference between 
regular and irregular plural forms: 
- Regular count nouns take s or es to form their plural. 
e.g. table – tables, chair – chairs 
- Irregular count nouns are nouns that do not take s or 
es to form their plural.  
e.g. child – children; ox – oxen; man – men; goose – 
geese 
 
 Plural nouns without plural markers 
 
 Have learners discover the plural nouns without plural 
marker in context. 
e.g. The sheep are grazing outside.  
I met a lot of people at the party. 
 
 
B5.3.1.1.3 Identify and use collective nouns to refer to a 
group of objects and people 
 
 Teach collective nouns in context. 
 Introduce a text that contains examples of collective 
nouns 
       e.g. such as audience, congregation, a flock of sheep, a 
troop of monkeys 
 Have learners discuss the meaning of these words in 
context. 
 Put them into groups to provide more examples of 
collective nouns and use these nouns in sentences. 
 Let the groups present their work to the class for 
feedback. 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development  
 
 
 
 
Personal Development 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
108 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
CONT’D 
 
B5.3.1.1.4. Identify and use abstract nouns to refer to 
concepts and ideas 
 Revise concrete nouns.   
 Introduce abstract nouns as nouns that cannot be 
touched, seen or felt.  They include ghost, beauty, 
holiness, air, etc. 
 Provide a passage with concrete and abstract nouns and 
let learners identify each category. 
 Have learners use given concrete and abstract nouns in 
sentences. 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
Writing  
 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
Reading and Writing 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
109 
 Sub-Strand 2: Determiners 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.2.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of determiners in 
communication 
 
 
B5.3.2.1.1. Identify and use indefinite and definite articles ‘a’ and 
‘an’ to refer to a person, animal, event, time or objects in general 
Note: Teacher should use level-appropriate vocabulary to teach the articles.  
 Provide an appropriate text containing abstract, concrete nouns.  
 Revise the lesson on nouns. Use the same text to introduce definite, 
indefinites and zero articles. Guide learners with examples to list the 
articles in the passage. 
 Help learners to form sentences using the articles. 
 
B5.3.2.1.2. Identify and use quantifiers to show qualities: 
 ordinal first, second etc.) 
 a few/a little etc. 
 both each/every 
 Another, other 
 Fewer, less, etc. 
 Introduce other types of determiners like each, both, and all. 
  Let learners read the sentences containing these determiners and 
explain the sentences. 
 Provide a text and let learners identify the determiners in a group 
activity. 
 Provide a context containing quantifiers. With examples help learners 
to identify them. e.g. 
i. Numerals (cardinals –one, two, three) 
ii. Ordinals (first, second, third...) 
iii. Some few/little etc. 
iv. No/both, all, each/every. 
 Help learners to use the quantifiers in sentences. 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development  
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
Reading  
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
110 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.2.1: Apply knowledge 
of different types of 
determiners in 
communication 
(cont.) 
 
B5.3.2.1.3. Identify and use possessive pronouns to show 
possession 
 Provide an interesting story abundant in possessives, e.g. mine, 
yours, his  
      e.g. This is mine. 
 Let learners use possessives like mine, yours, his, hers, theirs in 
sentences 
        e.g. This story is mine. 
 
B5.3.2.1.4. Identify and use demonstratives:  
-this/that, these/those people 
 Have learners identify demonstrations like this/that, these/those 
in context. 
 Guide learners with examples to write down the 
demonstratives. 
 Have learners use them in sentences.  
               e.g. 
i. This is for John. 
ii. That is his plan. 
 
 B5.3.2.1.5. Identify and use interrogative determiners 
e.g. which, whose -to find out which person something 
belongs to.  
 Choose a text that illustrates interrogatives. With an example 
from the text, guide learners to identify the other interrogatives 
in the passage. 
 Create a scenario for them to use the demonstratives 
appropriately in sentences. 
 
Communication and 
collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
Communication and 
collaboration 
 
Personal Development  
 
Writing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
111 
Sub-Strand 3: Pronouns 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of pronouns in 
communication 
 
B5.3.3.1.1. Identify and use indefinite pronouns e.g. someone, 
anyone, everything etc.  
Possessive pronouns to show possession, e.g. mine, ours etc. 
 Introduce indefinite pronouns with examples in sentences. 
 Discuss the indefinite pronouns with learners. 
 Provide a passage and group learners to identify indefinite 
pronouns, and use the pronouns identified in sentences. 
 Repeat the procedure to teach possessive pronouns. 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
Listening Speaking and Reading 
 
Sub- Strand 4: Adjectives 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.4.1:  Apply the 
knowledge of adjectives 
in communication 
 
B5.3.4.1.1. Use comparatives forms of regular and irregular 
adjectives to make comparisons:  
 Regular e.g. shorter 
 Irregular: better 
      Note:  The teacher should use level-appropriate vocabulary to introduce 
these concepts. 
 Revise the formation of the comparative adjective using er and 
the superlative using est .e.g. fat, fatter, fattest 
 Introduce learners to formation of comparison for irregular 
adjectives 
 Let them form the comparative forms for irregular adjectives.  
e.g.         
                                    good           better           
                                            Bad             worse            
 Introduce drills to give learners practice in their usage. 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
Reading and Writing 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
112 
 
Sub-Strand 5: Verbs 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
 
B5.3.5.1.1. Use different types of verbs in sentences: 
 Main verb 
 Helping verb (primary auxiliary and modal 
auxiliary 
 
 Revise verbs using context.   
 Let learners identify main verbs in sentences. 
               e.g. The boy has bought a new football. 
 Provide a text and guide learners to identify auxiliary (Primary 
and Modal) verbs. e.g. is, was, have, has, had, etc. 
 Create situations and introduce drills for learners to have 
practice using them. 
 
B5.3.5.1.2. Use appropriate subject-verb agreement: 
 
 Review subjects and verbs in simple sentences. 
 Use examples to introduce and explain subject-verb agreement. 
 Present sentences with missing subjects and others without 
verbs for learners to complete. 
 Introduce drills e.g. a completion drill to give further practice. 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
113 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
CONT’D 
B5.3.5.1.3. Use the simple present form of verbs to express:  
-Needs/preferences,  
-Thoughts and ideas 
 
 Revise the simple present form of verbs:  
 For habitual actions 
 For timeless and universal statements 
 For facts which may change or hold true indefinitely 
 For instantaneous present 
 For scheduled future actions 
Introduce the simple present form of verbs in sentences to express 
needs/preferences, and thoughts/ideas 
 
express needs/preferences 
-  I need new clothes. 
-  I like playing football more than volleyball. 
 
thoughts/ideas 
-  I think you are right. 
 Introduce these appropriately, one at a time and give 
practice. 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
114 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication  
CONT’D 
  
B5.3.5.1.4. Use the simple past form of verbs to express past 
needs, interest and feeling: 
 
 Review the simple present form of verbs by asking learners to use 
them in sentences to express needs/preferences, and thoughts/ideas. 
 Review the simple past form of verbs by using them to indicate:  
 Completed actions or events 
 Regular actions in the past 
 Introduce the use of the simple past form of verbs in sentences to 
express needs, interest and feelings 
e.g. Yesterday,  I needed some money.   
.I felt his absence badly. 
I was interested in winning the competition last year.  
 Introduce these in turns and provide activities for practice. 
 
B5.3.5.1.5. Use irregular form of the simple past tense of verbs, 
e.g. 
 Irregular – build-built 
 Revise regular verbs in simple past forms 
 Introduce the simple past forms of irregular verb in context. 
 In groups, have learners come out with more simple past forms of 
irregular verbs. 
 Let groups read their verbs to the class. 
Have learners use the verbs (past forms) in sentences 
 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
Listening and Speaking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
Listening and Speaking 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
115 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication (cont.) 
 
B5.3.5.1.6. Use the past continuous form of verbs to talk about 
actions/events that were going on when a second action/event 
took place. 
 
 Introduce the concept by reviewing the present continuous form of 
verbs. 
 Use the concept in context and have learners identify the time of the 
actions. 
 Have learners construct similar sentences 
 Explain that the past continuous form of verbs is used to talk about 
actions/events that were going on when a second action/event 
took place. 
 In pairs let learners write sentences using the past continuous form 
of verbs.  
 
B5.3.5.1.7. Use the imperative forms of verbs to give instructions 
and directions 
 
       e.g. Switch on the light. 
               Turn right. 
 Revise commands and requests. 
 Invite pairs of learners to demonstrate giving instructions and 
directions 
 Create situations for learners to have practice. 
 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
116 
 
Sub-Strand 6: Adverbs 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.6.1:  Apply the 
knowledge of different 
types of adverbs in 
communication 
B5.3.6.1.1. Use adverbs to express manner 
 
 Revise verbs and adverbs of place and time. 
 Provide a passage with adverbs of manner. 
 Have learners identify the adverbs and their functions – 
modifying verbs. 
              e.g. Mercy ate slowly. 
 Pair up learners to write short paragraphs using adverbs of 
manner. 
 Have pairs present their work to the class for feedback. 
 
Communication and collaboration  
 
Personal Development 
Listening, Speaking and Reading  
 
 
Sub-Strand 7: Idiomatic Expressions 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.7.1: Understand 
and use idiomatic 
expressions 
appropriately in speech 
and in writing 
 
B5.3.7.1.1. Identify, explain and use idiomatic expressions 
correctly 
 Revise idiomatic expressions such as: 
i. Take after (to resemble) 
ii. To pull down(to destroy the reputation of someone) 
 Provide a number of idiomatic expressions and discuss their 
meaning (in context) with learners.  
 Help learners to interpret given idiomatic expressions in 
contexts. E.g.                
i. Kofi takes after his father. 
ii. They pulled down the old school building. 
 Have learners use  idiomatic expressions in their own 
sentences.  
Communication and collaboration  
 
Personal Development 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
117 
 
Sub-Strand 8: Conjunctions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.8.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
conjunctions in speech 
and in writing  
 
 
B5.3.8.1.1. Identify and use simple conjunctions-because, since, 
so, although –to  
 -give reasons,  
-link contrasting ideas  
-show results 
 
 Revise simple conjunctions.  Provide simple sentences and let 
learners join them using and, or/nor, but.  
 Introduce because, since, so, although in context. 
e.g.:   
I'm late because I missed the bus. 
Although Afi is has eye problems, she doesn't wear glasses. 
He eats well, so he is healthy. 
 Guide learners to discover the functions of these conjunctions. 
 Have them practise using these conjunctions in their own 
sentences. 
 Provide a passage and have learners identify the conjunctions in 
the passage. 
 Let learners form pairs of simple sentences and join them with 
the conjunctions identified. 
 
Communication and collaboration  
 
Personal Development 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
118 
Sub-Strand 9: Modals 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.9.1: Apply the 
knowledge of modals in 
speech and in writing 
 
B5.3.9.1.1.Use modals to express a variety of meanings: 
 
 Can: conveys ability- I can drive 
 May: asks for permission, expresses politeness, 
possibility- May I go out? 
 Must: obligation or compulsion, necessity 
 Shall/will: prediction, intention, determination etc. 
 Could: tentativeness, politeness 
 Would: politeness 
 Might: possibility 
 Should: obligation 
 Used to: for past activity/event 
 Have to/ought to/need to: for obligation 
 Introduce these (one or two at a time) in context. 
 Use situations and drills to give learners ample practice. 
 
Communication and collaboration  
 
Personal Development 
 
 
Listening and Speaking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
119 
 
 
Sub-Strand 10: Prepositions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.10.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
prepositions in oral and 
written communication 
 
 
B5.3.10.1.1. Use prepositions to convey a variety of meanings: 
 
 Position,  e.g. by 
 Direction, e.g. towards 
 Time,  e.g. at 
 Purpose,  e.g. for 
 Possession,  e.g. for 
 Comparison, e.g. taller than 
 Support or opposition,  e.g. for you, against you 
 Provide a text and guide learners with examples to identify 
prepositions used to show different meanings. 
 Let learners construct sentences to convey the following 
meanings using appropriate prepositions. 
i. Position – she is standing by the car. 
ii. Direction – They went towards the East.  
iii. Time – He left at dawn. 
iv. Purpose – I bought this hoe for weeding my garden. 
v. Possession – The shirt is for Kofi. 
vi. Comparison – She is taller than her brother. 
vii. Support or opposition – My views are against his 
plans. 
 
Communication and collaboration  
 
Personal Development 
 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
120 
 
Strand 4: Writing 
Sub-Strand 2: Penmanship and Handwriting 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.2.1: Copy and 
rewrite sentences 
correctly 
B5.4.2.1.1. Copy sentences clearly in joint script maintaining 
legible handwriting 
 Select sentences from texts learners have read and write them 
on the board, using joint script. 
e.g. 
 
 
 Have learners read out the sentence. (in pairs, small groups, 
large groups) 
 Have learners copy the sentences into their exercise book. 
 Go round to support struggling pupils. 
 
Communication and collaboration  
 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
121 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.2.1: Copy and 
rewrite simple 
sentences correctly 
B5.4.2.1.2. Write compound sentences clearly and correctly 
 
 Review  simple sentences by asking learners to construct them 
using given verbs 
 Construct compound sentences and discuss their structure 
with learners (they are sentences that have at least two 
subject and predicates joined by a coordinating conjunction). 
 Give out texts to small groups of learners to search for 
compound sentences 
 Have the groups write them into their exercise books. 
 Have individual learners write parallel simple sentences (They 
should follow the structure of the sentences identified by the 
groups. 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
Reading and Writing 
Communication and collaboration  
 
Personal Development 
 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
122 
Sub-Strand 3: Paragraph Development 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.3.1: Develop, 
organize and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing and 
representing for a 
variety of purposes, 
audience and context 
 
B5.4.3.1.1. Choose appropriate ways and modes of writing 
for a variety of purposes, audience and contexts and 
organise facts, ideas and/or points of view in a way 
appropriate to the mode of delivery, using appropriate text 
features 
 
 Work with learners to select sample texts from a variety of 
models of writing from learners’ readers and Teacher’s 
resources e.g. newspapers, magazines etc.  You may take 
learners to the library for this exercise.  
           Examples of modes of writing. 
i. Process 
ii. Narration 
iii. Description 
iv. Comparison 
v. Problem solution 
vi. Classification 
vii. Argument 
 
Note:  Refer to B4 Strand 4, Sub strand 2, Indicators 1 – 3 for 
explanation of the modes of writing. 
 
 Put learners into small groups and assign each group a mode 
of writing. 
 
Note:  Present one mode of writing at a time and in different lessons. 
 Have learners study the sample text. 
 Guide them through appropriate questions to identify the: 
i. Mode of writing/types of essay 
ii. Purpose 
iii. Audience 
Collaboration and  Communication 
 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership Skills 
Reading and Writing 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
123 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.3.1: Develop, 
organize and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing and 
representing for a 
variety of purposes, 
audience and context  
CONT’D 
           Jumble the paragraphs and have learners re-arrange the 
paragraphs into a coherent piece in groups. 
 Encourage learners to use search engines to search for the 
different modes of writing they have studied. 
 Discuss the various modes of writing with learners. Have 
learners read a text to identify the structure of each mode.  
 
 
B5.4.3.1.2. Identify the main idea and minor ideas/supporting 
details in a paragraph 
 
 
 Display a Model Paragraph, e.g. 
The children of Boti go to great lengths to seek the power of 
education and reading. For example, they build their own school at the 
beginning of the year! To do this, they use mud to make bricks to 
build the walls and desks. They use grass and saplings and make a 
roof. Also, the children of Boti work very hard studying during the 
school year. Every day they learn something new. Finally, at the end of 
the year, their minds become fat with knowledge. This is how the 
children of Boti work hard to seek the power of education and 
reading. 
 
 Have learners read it (or read it to them). Have them do 
Think-Pair-Share and answer the questions: 
i. What is this paragraph about?  
ii. How do you know? 
 Guide learners towards the idea that the main idea of the 
paragraph is revealed in the first sentence. Underline the first 
sentence of the paragraph and write “Topic Sentence” in the 
margin next to it.  
 
Collaboration and  Communication 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership Skills 
Reading and Writing 
Writing and Reading 
Digital Literacy 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
124 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.3.1: Develop, 
organize and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing and 
representing for a 
variety of purposes, 
audience and context 
CONT’D 
 
 Guide learners to identify the details of the paragraph and the 
sentences that contain these details.  
 Repeat the same process for other sentences. 
 Have learners write their own paragraphs (Guide them to 
select a topic). Move round to support them. 
 
 
B5.4.3.1.3. Elaborate on, explain and or justify the main ideas 
of a paragraph by providing explanation and examples 
 
 Display a model paragraph preferably the one above (Refer to 
B5. 4.3.1.2) 
 By way of revision, have learners identify the main idea and 
supporting ideas. 
          Think-Pair-Share: Have pairs of learners discuss why a 
main idea in a paragraph needs 
elaboration/explanation/examples, and share their views 
with peers and the whole class. 
 Give learners a topic sentence for them to elaborate on by 
providing details (explanation/examples). 
 
 
Topic sentence: Kofi is a boy. 
Details ........................................................ 
               ........................................................ 
 
 
Collaboration and  Communication 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership Skills 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
125 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.6.1: Develop, 
organize and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing and 
representing for a 
variety of purposes, 
audience and context 
CONT’D 
 
B5.4.3.1.4. Use cohesive devices –pronouns, repetition of 
vocabulary or grammatical structures to link ideas in a 
paragraph, e.g. use connectors to link similar ideas, give 
reasons and add information.  
 
 Display a sample paragraph. 
 Underline the cohesive devices/transitional words.  
 Have learners read the paragraph and discuss with their peers 
what the underlined words are doing in the paragraph. 
 Lead them in a general discussion on what the underlined 
words are and their role in the paragraph.  
 Provide a paragraph and leave out the cohesive devices. Have 
learners complete the paragraph with appropriate transitional 
words. 
Collaboration and  Communication 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership Skills 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
126 
 
Sub-Strand 9: Writing as a Process 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.9.1: Apply the 
skills and strategies for 
idea generation, 
selection, development, 
organization and 
revision in writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.4.9.2: Develop and 
express ideas 
coherently and 
cohesively in writing 
B5.4.9.1.1. Select a topic of choice on issues in their 
community, brainstorm and organise ideas before writing 
 
 Scaffold the writing process. 
i. Pre-writing 
 Have learners select and discuss topics of interest on issues in 
their community with their partners. 
 Have learners use strategies such as brainstorming and mind 
map to generate as many ideas as possible about the topics. 
 Have them organize the ideas into a writing plan using an 
outline, a chart or appropriate graphic organizer. 
 
 e.g. line diagram 
 
                                                     Poor sanitation 
 
 
       What is poor  sanitation       causes/effects           solution 
 
 
B5.4.9.2.1. Develop ideas into a two-paragraph draft without 
considering the writing conventions, using appropriate linking 
words within and across paragraphs to aid cohesion and avoid 
ambiguity, e.g. firstly, then, after 
 
 Put learners into groups to develop their ideas in B5.4.9.1.1  
into a three- paragraph draft. 
Collaboration and Communication 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Critical Thinking 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
127 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.9.3: Apply 
strategies for improving 
drafts for publishing 
 
 
B5.4.9.3.1. Review, and revise the draft by proposing 
grammar for improvement Have learners review their first draft 
by reading it slowly and critically several times to identify 
words/expressions that need to be cancelled. 
 Guide learners with the questions below: 
i. Are your ideas in order and easy to understand? 
ii. Are all the sentences talking about the main idea of the 
paragraph? 
iii. Are all the paragraphs talking about the topic? 
 
 Have learners read their partners’ draft and offer suggestions. 
 Encourage learners to feel free to make as many changes as 
possible to improve their drafts. 
 Have learners make a clean draft for publishing. 
 
B4.4.9.3.2. Edit/proofread draft, checking capitalization, usage 
of punctuation and spelling 
 Have learners pick up their clean draft (Refer to B5 4.9.3.1) 
and check for conventions. E.g. errors in capitalization, 
punctuation and spelling. 
Tips for learners 
i. Do my sentences have proper punctuation? E.g. full stop, 
question mark, exclamation mark. 
ii. Have I used commas correctly? 
iii. Do my sentences start with capital letters? 
iv. Have I capitalized proper nouns?  
 Have learners do peer editing. 
 Have them prepare neat final copies. 
 Guide them to proofread the final copies before publishing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration and Communication  
 
Critical Thinking 
Writing 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
128 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.9.3: Apply 
strategies for improving 
drafts for publishing 
CONT’D 
B5.4.9.3.3. Display writing piece for peers to read and publish it 
in the class magazine 
 Have learners share their writing with their peers classmates and 
families. 
Encourage learners to copy neatly their writing and submit them for 
publication in the class magazine, school magazine or notice board, The 
Junior Graphic 
Collaboration and Communication  
 
Critical Thinking 
Writing 
 
 
Sub-Strand 10: Narrative Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.10.1: Narrate 
situations, express 
feelings and convey 
point of view about the 
world/ or fictional world 
 
B5.4.10.1.1. Create settings, characters and at least one plot 
in a narrative text, using appropriate linking words within 
and across paragraphs to aid cohesion, and using simple 
literary devices, e.g. direct speech  
 Revise the stages of the writing process with learners. 
              e. g. prewriting, writing, revising, editing and publishing. 
 Guide learners through the process to write about real or 
imagined experiences or events.  
             e. g. personal narrative 
 Discuss personal narrative with learners:  
Note: 
A personal narrative is a true story told from the writer’s point of 
view. It is the retelling of an event or experience that has affected 
the writer’s life.  The story should be told naturally to allow 
readers to experience the event(s) for themselves. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
Reading and Writing 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
129 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.10.1: Narrate 
situations, express 
feelings and convey 
point of view about the 
world/ or fictional world 
CONT’D 
 
  Prewriting 
 Put learners into groups of five (5) and have them select a 
topic, purpose and audience for their narrative writing. 
           e.g. Topic:  How I spent my Christmas holidays. 
 
            Purpose: to share an important experience. 
 
Audience: Classmates 
 
 Guide learners to individually use appropriate graphic 
organizers to generate, gather and organize ideas and details 
for writing. 
E. g. Time Line, 5 Ws Chart. 
 
Time Line Organiser 
 Use Time Line for personal narratives to list actions or events 
in the order in which they occurred. 
              e.g. Topic......... 
 
Events in Chronological Order 
1.          Event       1 
2.          Event       2 
3.          Event       3 
 
5 W’s Chart 
 Use 5 W’s Chart to collect the” who?  what?  when? where? 
and why?” details for personal narratives and news stories. 
How could be added to the list. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
130 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.10.1: Narrate 
situations, express 
feelings and convey point 
of view about the world/ 
or fictional world 
CONT’D 
 
 
   e.g. Topic____________________ 
 
            Who?        What?         When?        Where?       Why? 
 
 
 
 
 Guide learners to organize their details into writing plant 
(beginning, middle and ending). 
 
Writing stage 
 Learners then revise their first draft by ensuring the writing 
has a beginning, middle and ending. 
 Learners should ensure they have used descriptive words.  
They have written about what they saw, heard, smelled, 
tasted and touched. 
 
Revising:  checklist for narrative writing 
i. Does my essay have beginning, middle and ending? 
ii. Have I used descriptive words? 
iii. Are my ideas/events arranged in the order in which 
they occurred? 
iv. Does my narrative sound natural? 
v. Do I express how I feel about what happened? 
 
Editing 
 Have learners use the checklist above to edit their first 
draft for the conventions of punctuation, capitalization, 
spelling and grammar.   
 
Publish 
 Have learners share their work with peers. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development 
 
Reading and Writing 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
131 
Sub-Strand 11: Creative/ Free Writing 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.11.1: Create texts  B5.4.11.1.1. Write freely on topics of choice on issues in 
the community 
 Revise the stages of the writing process 
 Have  learners follow the writing process to create their 
own pieces on a given topic.  
 Learners present their work for editing. 
 Have pupils publish their works on the notice board. 
 
B5.4.11.1.2. Write poems and imaginative narrative 
stories using knowledge of features of poems and 
imaginative texts 
 Discuss elements of narrative stories with learners. 
- Title 
- Characters 
- Setting 
- Plot/story line  
- Conflict dialogue etc. 
-  
Note: Stories have people (characters) who face a problem (conflict) 
in a particular place and time (setting).  They show what people do 
(action) and say (dialogue) to resolve the problem. 
 
 Guide learners through the writing process to write their 
stories. 
 Put pupils into small groups to plan their writing. 
- Create characters 
- Create conflict 
- Establish a setting 
- Plan action and dialogue 
Collaboration Communication 
 
Critical Thinking 
Reading and Writing 
Creativity and Innovation 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
132 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.11.1: Create texts 
CONT’D 
 
 Have learners write the first draft, revise, edit and publish 
their writing. 
 Refer to Strand 4, Sub-strand for the details of the stages of 
the writing process. 
 
Poems and Plays: 
 Discuss sentences of poems and plays. 
Guide learners through the writing process to write poems and 
plays. 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
133 
 
Sub-Strand 12: Descriptive Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.12.1: Demonstrate 
knowledge of 
descriptive 
words/expressions in 
writing  
B5.4.12.1.1. Use descriptive 
words/expressions/sound devices/ figurative 
language to describe places, personal experiences 
and events. 
 
 Revise descriptive writing with learners. 
 Talk about sensory details that allow a reader to 
visualize a person, a place, a thing or an idea. 
 Guide learners through the stages of writing. 
 Write to describe events/situations/places of 
their choice and personal experiences.  Focus on 
the use of: 
- Descriptive (adjectives) 
- Figurative language e.g. simile – metaphor 
- Sensory details (sensory details that are 
experience through the senses: sight, 
smell, touch, taste 
 
 
Collaboration Communication 
 
Critical Thinking 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
134 
Sub-Strand 13:  Persuasive/Argumentative Writing 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.13.1: Support an 
opinion in writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.4.13.2: Write 
arguments to support 
claims with clear reasons 
and relevant evidence 
 
B5.4.13.1.1. Write explanations to support opinions 
 
 Present a motion to learners.  
              e.g. A teacher is more important than a doctor. 
 Discuss the meaning and implication of the motion with 
pupils and  invite them to take a stand either for or against 
the motion. 
 Put learners into two groups: for the motion and against 
the motion to write down what they think about it. 
 Groups read out their opinions to the class for discussion. 
 
B5.4.13.2.1. Introduce claims and support them with clear 
reasons and evidence using credible sources 
 
 Working in groups (as in B5.7.1.1), learners provide 
reasons for the opinions they hold on a topic. 
 Guide groups to provide evidence for the opinions they 
hold. 
 Have groups present their work for discussions.   
 
B5.4.13.2.2. Use words, phrases, and clauses to clarify the 
relationships between claim(s) and reasons 
 
 Lead learners to discuss appropriate language for 
arguments e. g. use of adjectives in their various forms. 
 You may read out models of argumentative essays to guide 
learners. 
Collaboration Communication 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
Listening and Speaking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Collaboration Communication 
 
Critical Thinking 
Listening and Speaking 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
135 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.13.2: Write 
arguments to support 
claims with clear reasons 
and relevant evidence 
CONT’D 
B5.4.13.2.3. Establish and maintain a formal style 
 
 Using models, discuss the basic structure of an 
argumentative piece: 
- Introduction. 
- Reasons for the stand taken. 
- Conclusion. 
 Have groups present full compositions using this structure 
for class discussions and feedback. 
 
B5.4.13.2.4. Provide a concluding statement that follows 
from the arguments presented 
 
 Revise persuasive writing.  
 Have them go through the writing process to present/state 
an opinion, explain and justify it so as to persuade the reader 
to accept their opinion or point of view.  
 Teach the features of a debate. 
 Guide learners to select a controversial or debatable topic.  
Divide the class into two to prepare using the writing 
process as a guide, and debate on the topic. 
 
Collaboration Communication 
 
Listening and Speaking 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
136 
 
Sub-Strand 14: Informative/Expository Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.14.1: Write 
informative/ expository 
essays 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.4.14.2: Write the 
event of the day 
 
B5.4.14.1.1. Write sentences to describe a process of doing 
something 
 
 Use pictures showing the stages of how some dishes are 
prepared. 
 Learners in groups observe the picture sequences and write 
words that give information on the activity. 
 Each group presents its work for discussion. 
 Let learners in groups choose a domestic activity they would 
want to give information on. (They should be able to compose 
expository pieces of between 90 and 120 words).  
 
B5.4.14.2.1. Write about incidence or events of the day (e.g. 
any event witnessed on their way to school) and make radio/TV 
presentations 
 
 Let learners watch TV news at home and write their own news 
from the pictures they see. 
 Put learners into groups. Let them brainstorm and write about 
events of the day. Each group chooses an interesting event and 
writes the news to broadcast to the class. Let each group 
choose one person to present the news. 
 Have learners publish their works on the internet.  
 Help learners to organize a radio or talk show 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Critical Thinking 
 
Digital Literacy 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
137 
 
 
Sub-Strand 15: Letter Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.15.1: Write informal 
letters on given topics 
 
B5.4.15.1.1. Write to friends about events using 
appropriate letter formats 
 
 In groups learners are given samples of friendly letters.   
 Let them brainstorm and write the important features of 
the letter and other special things they identify in the 
letters. 
 Learners present their information to the whole class to 
guide the class to learn about such letters. 
 Guide learners in their groups to choose an imaginary 
friend they want to write to. 
 Learners brainstorm and write down ideas on what they 
would want to include in their letters. 
 Guide them to write their letters and let them edit their 
work.   
 Learners exchange their product with other groups to edit. 
 Learners read their letters to others. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
138 
 
STRAND 5: USING WRITING CONVENTIONS/GRAMMAR USAGE 
Sub-Strand 1: Using Capitalisation 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.1.1: Use capital 
letters to start the first 
words in a direct 
speech 
B5.5.1.1.1. Follow appropriate mechanical convention 
 
 Ask individual learners to write a formal letter each on a given 
topic paying attention to correct use of capital letters, the full 
stop, comma, question mark, exclamation mark, quotation 
mark, apostrophe, hyphen etc. 
 
B5.5.1.1.2. Writing of lower case and capital letters. 
 
 Guide learners to write about their friends by reading a 
sample essay on the topic to them. 
 Guide learners to write one paragraph about their friends 
after listening to the teacher read a sample essay on the topic 
to them. 
 Learners in pairs plan their writing. 
 Let individuals write about their friends.  Learners exchange 
their work with their partners and guide them to edit. 
 Ask learners to begin their editing by looking at capital letters 
e.g. Words that need to start with capital letters   such as 
proper names and letters beginning sentences. 
 Learners go round to help colleagues who have challenges.  
 Let learners read some of the finished work in class. 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Listening, Speaking, Reading and 
Writing 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
139 
Sub-Strand 2: Using Punctuation 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.2.1: Show 
understanding of how 
punctuations are used 
appropriately in writing 
 
B5.5.2.1.1. Use punctuations: 
- (the comma) to write an address; 
-  (the apostrophe) in contraction 
 
 Revise the use of the comma before and after "Yes" and 
"No" in sentences; after addressing a person, e.g. Kofi, can 
you help me? 
 Introduce the use of the comma to write an address, and the 
apostrophe in contraction in context. Provide sample 
sentences/texts for learners to identify the target 
punctuations. Introduce one punctuation at a time 
e.g.  I live at Adu Street, Adukrom. 
          They can't do the work.  
 Have learners practise using the comma to write an address, 
and the apostrophe in contraction. Give pairs of learners 
unpunctuated sentences/texts to punctuate.  
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Writing  
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
140 
Sub-Strand 3: Naming Words/Nouns 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
B5.5.3.1.1. Identify and use nouns or noun phrases to refer to 
quantities or units. 
 
 Introduce quantities and units in context.  
               e.g. 
-  Please, give me a piece of paper. 
I have a pair of trousers 
 
B5.5.3.1.2. Identify and use  proper nouns to refer to 
festivals; common nouns: 
 Count/non-count 
 Singular 
 Plural (regular, irregular) 
 plural without plural marker 
 
 Proper nouns  
 Introduce the concept in context. 
             e.g.  Christmas is coming. 
                     The people of Ga celebrate Homowo.  
 
 Count and non-count nouns. 
 Revise the concept of proper nouns and common nouns 
giving and eliciting several examples. 
 (Proper nouns refer to particular nouns such as names of 
people, places, mountains, etc.) 
 Provide a text and let learners identify count and non-count 
nouns. 
 Have groups use the nouns identified in simple sentences. 
 Invite groups to present their work. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem  
Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
141 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
 
Singular and Plural (regular, irregular) nouns 
 Introduce singular and plural nouns in context.  
              e. g. I need a table. Can you give me one of these tables? 
       This child looks sick, but those children look healthy.  
 
 Have learners read the sentences and observe the 
underlined words. 
 Show pictures of objects/people to help learners  identify 
regular and irregular nouns. 
             e. g. picture of a child and a picture of children. 
 Guide learners to discover the difference between regular 
and irregular plural forms: 
- Regular count nouns take s or es to form their plural. 
             e.g. table – tables, chair – chairs 
- Irregular count nouns are nouns that do not take s or es 
to form their plural.  
              e.g. child – children; ox – oxen;  
                      man – men; goose – geese 
Put learners into groups 
 Have groups construct sentences with given singular and 
plural nouns and share their work with the class. 
 
 Plural nouns without plural markers 
 Have learners discover the plural nouns without plural 
marker in context. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
142 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
B5.5.3.1.3. Identify and use collective nouns to refer to a 
group of objects and people 
 
 Teach collective nouns in context. 
 Introduce a text that contains examples of collective 
nouns 
              e.g. such as audience, congregation, a flock of sheep, a 
troop of monkeys,  
 Have learners discuss the meaning of these words in 
context. 
 Put them into groups to provide more examples of 
collective nouns and use these nouns in sentences. 
 Let the groups present their work to the class for 
feedback. 
 
B5.5.3.1.4. Identify and use abstract nouns to refer to 
concepts and ideas 
 
 Revise concrete nouns.  Introduce abstract nouns as 
nouns or names of things that cannot be touched, seen or 
felt.  They include ghost, beauty, holiness, mercy, etc. 
 Provide a passage with concrete and abstract nouns and 
let learners identify each category. 
 Have learners use given concrete and abstract nouns in 
sentences. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Reading and Writing 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
143 
Sub-Strand 4: Using action Words 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.4.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of verbs 
in everyday language 
 
B5.5.4.1.1. Differentiate between how the simple past and 
the    present perfect tense forms are used in speech and in 
writing 
 Distribute a sample story and let learners identify the simple 
past verbs to observe how they are used in sentences. 
 Working in pairs, learners write their own story using the 
simple past.   
 Guide learners to do their own editing paying attention to 
the correct use of the simple past. 
 Follow the same procedure to guide learners to identify uses 
of the present perfect tense. 
 Have learners compare how the two tenses are different. 
 
B5.5.4.1.2. Use the simple past verb form to express past 
needs, feelings and interest 
 Let learners write on a story. 
              e. g. What happened after school on Monday? 
 Discus the essay topic with learners and use the webbing 
strategy to help them write on the chosen topic.  Learners 
write individually. 
 Learners exchange their work and edit as teacher guides by 
focusing on the past verb form and past participle form.. 
 Guide learners to rewrite the essay incorporating the 
corrections. 
 Let learners write on another topic individually using the past 
verb form. 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Reading and Writing 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
144 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.4.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of verbs 
in everyday language 
 
B5.5.4.1.3. Use past perfect in speech and in writing 
 
 Narrate an event in the past. 
 Discuss the narration and have learners identify sentences 
that are in the simple past and those in the past perfect. 
 Put learners in groups to write their own narratives on a 
given topic making use of both simple past and past perfect 
sentences. 
 Have groups share their work with the class. 
 
 
 
B5.5.4.1.4. Use singular and plural subjects and the verb 
forms that go with them.  
 
           Note: Let learners use the various tenses(simple, present perfect 
and past perfect)  
 
 Revise work done on subject-verb agreement and give 
additional practice. 
 Review the listed tenses. 
 Demonstrate that more than one of these may be used in an 
essay e.g. the simple present and the simple past as well as 
simple past and the past perfect. 
 Show samples of texts from their reader and elsewhere. 
 Provide topics for learners to practise with their groups. 
 
Reading and Writing 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
145 
Sub-Strand 5: Using Qualifying Words-Adjectives 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.5.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of 
adjectives in speech and 
in writing 
 
B5.5.5.1.1. Use comparative forms of regular and irregular 
adjectives to make comparisons 
 
 Show a picture of a family and guide the learners to talk about 
the people using the positive comparative and superlative forms 
of adjectives. 
 In groups, learners write a description of the members in each 
group.  Let them edit their work focusing on the use of forms 
of adjectives appropriately. 
 Learners can add the group picture to their presentation and 
publish in their class magazine. 
 Learners now write individually by describing the members of 
their nuclear families demonstrating their knowledge of the 
positive, comparative and superlative forms. 
 
Communication and Collaboration  
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Reading and Writing 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
146 
Sub-Strand 6: Using Adverbs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.6.1: Demonstrate  
understanding of the use 
of adverbs in speech and 
in writing 
B5.5.6.1.1. Use adverbs to express manner 
 
 Revise verbs and adverbs of place, time and manner. 
 Provide a passage with adverbs of manner. 
 Have learners identify the adverbs and their functions – 
modifying verbs. 
          E.g. Mercy ate slowly. 
 Pair up learners to write short paragraphs using adverbs of 
manner. 
 Have pairs present their work to the class for feedback. 
 
Reading and Writing 
Communication and Collaboration  
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
147 
Sub-Strand 7: Using Simple Prepositions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.7.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
prepositions in oral and 
written communication 
 
 
B5.5.7.1.1. Use prepositions to convey a variety of meanings 
 Use prepositions in sentences to convey the following 
meanings: 
 Position e.g. on 
 Direction e.g. to 
 Time e.g. at 
 Purpose e.g. for 
 Possession e.g. for 
 Comparison e.g. taller than 
 Support or opposition e.g. for you, against you 
 Provide a text and guide learners with examples to identify 
positions used to show the following meanings. 
 Let learners construct sentences to convey the following uses 
of prepositions, to show: 
i. Position – she is standing by the car. 
ii. Direction – They went towards the East.  
iii. Time – He left at dawn. 
iv. Purpose – I bought this hoe for weeding my garden. 
v. Possession – The shirt is for Kofi 
vi. Comparison  
vii. Support or opposition – My views are against his plans. 
 Have learners with a short paragraph containing examples of 
the prepositions discussed. 
 
Communication and collaboration 
 
Writing  
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
148 
 
Sub-Strand 8: Using Conjunctions 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.8.1: Apply the 
knowledge of conjunctions 
in speech and in writing  
 
 
B5.5.8.1.1. Identify and use conjunctions- because, 
since, so, although – to 
-give reasons  
-link contrasting ideas  
-show results 
 
 Revise simple conjunctions.  Provide simple sentences 
and let learners join them using and, or/nor, but.  
 Introduce because, since, so, although, in context. 
              e.g.   
I'm late because I missed the bus. 
Although Afi is has eye problems, she doesn't wear 
glasses. 
He eats well, so he is healthy. 
 Guide learners to discover the functions of these 
conjunctions. 
 Have them practise using these conjunctions in their 
own sentences. 
 Provide a passage and have learners identify the 
conjunctions in the passage. 
 Let learners form sentences and join them with the 
conjunctions identified. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Writing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
149 
 
 
Sub-Strand 9: Using Simple, Compound and Complex Sentences 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.9.1: Apply 
knowledge of 
grammatical rules to 
form words, phrases and 
sentences 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.5.9.1.1. Identify subjects and predicates in compound 
sentences 
 
 Give learners an extract from a comprehension passage.  
 Guide them to identify the simple and compound 
sentences.  
 Let them identify the subjects and verbs in each compound 
sentence. 
 Let learners write about an event they had participated in, 
demonstrating their understanding of subject and 
predicate sentences. 
 Learners edit to demonstrate their knowledge of subject 
and predicate. 
 
B5.5.9.1.2. Construct compound sentences correctly 
 
 Review the use of coordinators in sentences.  
 Learners write examples of sentences containing 
coordinates. Let them write sentences demonstrating their 
knowledge in subject and predicate. 
 Learners in groups write a narrative exhibiting their 
knowledge of subject and predicate in compound 
sentences. 
 Guide them to edit their work and encourage them to 
share the final products with the class. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Reading and Writing 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
150 
Sub-Strand 10: Spelling 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.10.1: Spell words 
correctly 
 
 
B5.5.10.1.1. Use phonics knowledge to spell words 
 
 In groups, learners plan a spelling activity.  Each selects a 
number of words. Learners create a context  
              e.g.  
i. It is eaten on Christmas.  
ii. It is made of flour, eggs, sugar etc. 
iii. It is baked. 
 Learners identify the word, say it, spell and use it in a 
sentence.  This is a writing activity that can be done among 
two groups. 
 The scores are recorded and the champions rewarded. 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration  
 
 
STRAND 6: EXTENSIVE READING 
Sub-Strand 1: Building the Love and Culture of Reading 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.6.1.1: Read widely 
for pleasure, and to 
demonstrate 
independent reading 
and learning in the 
literary/content areas 
B5.6.1.1.1. Read a variety of age-  and level appropriate books 
and present  at least a-three-paragraph summary of each 
book read 
 Have learners read independently books of their choice during 
the library period. 
 Learners think-pair-share their stories with peers. 
 Ask each learner to write a-two-three paragraph summary of 
the book read. 
 Invite individuals to present their work to the class for 
feedback. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
151 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC 6  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
152 
BASIC 6 
STRAND 1: ORAL LANGUAGE 
Sub-Strand 1: Songs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B.6.1.1:Demonstrate 
understanding of  variety 
of songs 
B6.1.1.1.1. Relate the central messages  in songs to personal 
experiences 
 
 Engage learners to sing some familiar songs from their 
cultural background. 
 Write lines of songs on chalk board and have learners read 
through the lines. 
 Demonstrate singing of the songs as learners listen 
attentively. 
 Guide learners to sing song with stress and rhythm by 
clapping. 
 Invite learners to sing individually and in groups. 
 
B6.1.1.1.2. Compose songs around values discussed 
 
 Have learners to identify some familiar songs taught. 
 Guide them to sing identified songs with stress and rhythm. 
 Discuss the meaning of the songs and morals they teach. 
 Discuss values in the songs e.g. love, honesty etc. 
 Ensure appropriate vocabulary and expressions are used to 
discuss the moral values. 
 Put learners into small groups to compose songs around the 
values 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
153 
Sub-Strand 3: Poems 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.3.1: Appreciate 
poems and other pieces 
of literary materials  
 
 
B6.1.3.1.1 Relate the central messages of poems to personal 
experiences 
 
 Engage learners in reciting some familiar poems. 
 Introduce learners to an eight-line poem on the board. 
 Read/recite the poem clapping/tapping its rhythm. 
 Have learners read lines of the poem ensuring correct 
pronunciation of words. 
 Let learners take turns to read in groups and individually. 
 Have learners discuss the central message and relate it to their 
personal experiences. 
 
B6.1.3.1.2. Discuss values in poems and talk about the 
importance of these values in society 
 
 Engage learners to recite some familiar poems. 
 Discuss the meaning of lines using appropriate expressions and 
vocabulary of a selected poem. 
 Guide learners with questions to identify some values in the 
lines recited. 
 Have them relate the values identified to day-to-day living 
 
B6.1.3.1.3. Compose eight-line poems 
 
 Engage learners to recite some familiar poems. 
 Discuss the process of poem composition and lead learners to 
write a “class” poem. 
 Have learners work in groups to write some meaningful lines on 
a given topic. 
 Guide learners to put the lines or sentences together to 
constitute a meaningful eight-line poem. Have groups 
recite/perform their poems to the class. 
Personal Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
154 
 
Sub-Strand 4: Story Telling 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.4.1: Respond to 
stories 
 
B6.1.4.1.1. Make connections between texts or stories and 
personal experiences. 
 
 Have the learners recall one or two stories read/heard. 
 Tell or read a story to learners. 
 Invite individuals to retell the story sequentially using story 
map/herring bone strategy. 
 Lead the class to discuss the story and guide them to relate 
the story to their personal experiences. 
 
B6.1.4.1.2. Tell stories around given themes 
 
 Discuss themes in story telling. 
 Tell a story to learners 
 Guide learners with questions to identify the theme of the 
story e.g. love, honesty, patriotism, hard work, etc. 
 Based on the example, have learners tell stories around given 
themes. 
 With examples encourage the use of appropriate vocabulary 
to depict chosen themes. 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
155 
 
Sub-Strand 5: Dramatisation and Role Play 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.5.1               
Appreciate pieces of 
literary materials 
through dramatisation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.1.5.2: Appreciate key 
issues in stories/sketches 
 
B6.1.5.1.1. Dramatize/role-play whole/parts of stories/scenes, 
events 
 
 Guide learners through discussion to identify some 
stories/scenes, events etc. 
 Discuss the plot of the chosen story i.e. events at the beginning, 
middle, and ending. 
  Have learners prepare and dramatise/role-play whole/parts of 
stories/scene, events). 
Ensure the role-play/dramatization depicts selected theme. 
 Ensure appropriate vocabulary use as well as correct 
pronunciation. 
 
B6.1.5.2.1. Express personal opinion about moral lessons in 
sketches 
 Guide learners with questions to identify the structure 
(beginning, middle and ending) of familiar stories, e.g. Maame 
Akua at the Market. 
 Lead learners to discuss the plot of the particular story chosen. 
 Guide learners to role-play the story as others listen and 
observe and relate them to real life situation. 
 Using an example from the story guide learners to identify 
some moral values. 
 Learners express personal opinions about the moral lessons 
identified. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
156 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.5.2: Appreciate key 
issues in stories/sketches 
CONT’D 
B6.1.5.2.2. Write plays out of a story and perform them 
 Learners read out a story from textbooks or readers. 
 Through discussion, guide learners to tell the plot of the 
story. 
 Show a sample, and guide learners to write a play with the 
story told. 
 Have learners produce the written play around the 
identified themes and values. 
 
B6.1.5.2.3. Justify the central messages in sketches 
performed 
 Have learner discuss a sketch observed. 
 Learners say what to look for to identify key issues in a 
sketch. 
 Learners talk about lessons in the sketch. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
157 
Sub-Strand 6: Conversation - Talking about Oneself, Family, People, Customs,  
Socials/Cultural Values and Manners 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.6.1: Explore certain 
culturally acceptable 
language for 
communication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.1.6.2:Demonstrate 
positive listening and 
viewing attitudes and 
behaviour by showing 
attentiveness and 
understanding 
B6.1.6.1.1. Describe/talk about objects/personalities/ events 
in the country and the world 
 Revise previous discussions on the following:  
i. Objects – objects found in class, at home etc. 
ii. Dates – dates of birth 
iii. Time – various times at school in the day e.g. break 
time. 
iv. Names of regions – Central, Ashanti, Northern, 
etc. 
 Lead a discussion on: 
i. Personalities – e.g. role models, MPs, head of 
institution 
ii. Event – festivals, games, special occasions e.g. 
Christmas 
 Guide learners to use appropriate vocabulary in the 
discussion. 
 Encourage learners to ask and answer questions for 
clarification of other learners' opinions. 
  
B6.1.6.2.1. View and listen attentively and for a sustained 
period, (e.g., look at the person speaking and maintain eye 
contact) and record the key issues in the discussion 
 Introduce and explain the activity. 
 Demonstrate the activity/show or play it on the tape /video 
 Have groups/pairs converse on given topics as others 
observe and critique/ask questions for clarification 
 Encourage participants in a conversational to listen 
attentively and maintain eye contact. 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
158 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.6.2:Demonstrate 
positive listening and 
viewing attitudes and 
behaviour by showing 
attentiveness and 
understanding 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.1.6.3: Use knowledge 
of language and 
communicative skills to 
participate in 
conversation 
 
B6.1.6.2.2. Listen and view for the entire duration of 
text/speech/presentation/video etc. 
 Together with learners choose an already read text from their readers. 
 Discuss the text e.g. title, characters, simple literary terms 
 Guide learners to discuss the character traits of some characters and 
role-play them. 
Pause to ask learners questions in the process e. g. Do you think the characters 
said that?  
 
 
B6.1.6.3.1. Engage in collaborative conversation with unfamiliar 
audience 
Sample topics: social issues,  social values and manners   
 Show a video of a talk show or introduce a talk show by drawing on 
learners’ background knowledge of such activities on TV.  
 Identify an interesting topic e.g. “Children should not do WhatsApp”. 
Initiate a conversation using questions. Learners take turns to 
contribute to the conversation. 
 Put learners in groups and let them choose topics for conversation. Go 
round to ensure learners take turns, use facial expressions 
appropriately and maintain eye contact when in conversation. 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
159 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.6.3: Use knowledge 
of language and 
communicative skills to 
participate in 
conversation 
CONT’D 
B6.1.6.3.2. Demonstrate turn taking in conversation on different 
topics and follow agreed-upon rules for conversation and express 
thoughts coherently 
 
 Through discussion, guide learners to identify some current or recent 
events. 
 Choose one such event and engage in a model conversation with a 
learner earlier prepared. 
 Converse on a given topic with a learner as others watch. 
 Let learners, converse in pairs on different topics after the example. 
Encourage them to follow the rules of conversation. 
Guide the use of appropriate vocabulary by showing vocabulary cards and 
indirectly dropping hints of a correct word. 
 
B6.1.6.3.3. Ask and answer questions about key details on topics 
under discussion.  
 Put learners into groups to discuss topics such as "How I spend 
my holidays; My future career" etc. 
 Encourage learners to ask and answer questions for clarification 
about key details. 
Ensure appropriate vocabulary use by dropping hints and showing word cards. 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
160 
Sub-Strand 7: Listening Comprehension 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.7.1: Use 
appropriate skills and 
strategies to process 
meaning from texts 
B6.1.7.1.1. Employ Think Aloud and visualisation strategies to 
make meaning from level- appropriate texts 
 
 Have learners listen to teacher-read texts or video/audio 
recording on familiar topics. 
 Model the visualisation strategy to make meaning from texts 
heard. 
 Encourage learners to practise constructing meaning from the 
texts or play. 
 
B6.1.7.1.2. Relate the sequence of events (E.g. beginning, 
middle and end)stories/drama/texts 
 
 Referring to a recently read story, assist learners to identify the 
sequence of events in the story.   
              e.g. The beginning, middle, and ending. 
 Groups choose a story read or heard and identify the plot 
structure and list events at the beginning, middle and at the end. 
 
B6.1.7.1.3. Ask relevant questions to improve on 
understanding of moral lesson in text.  
 
 Revise the sequence of events in a familiar story/drama/text 
with learners.   
 Together with learners, identify the characters/the settings and 
moral lessons in the story/drama/text read.  
 Discuss the roles of characters, setting and the moral values in 
the text. 
 Ask relevant questions to improve understanding of elements in 
the texts. 
 Encourage learners to also ask question. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
161 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.7.1: Use appropriate 
skills and strategies to 
process meaning from texts 
B6.1.7.1.4. Use background knowledge to understand and 
build new knowledge while listening to informational text 
 
 Present an informational text on a given topic. 
 Use the K and W of KWL strategy to activate learners' 
background knowledge. 
 Have learners listen to the text 
 In groups, they identify and discuss the main ideas of the 
text.  
 Have learners listen to the text a second time. 
 In groups, learners share what they have learnt in the text. 
 
B6.1.7.1.5. Express own opinions about the details of texts 
 
 In pairs/groups, learners share the knowledge acquired 
from details of a story/drama/text heard.   
 Put learners into groups to express personal opinions 
about details of texts. 
 
B6.1.7.1.6. Identify the problems and solutions in texts 
 
 Ask questions for learners to recall the events and values 
in stories read. 
 Guide them to analyse these into cause(s) effect(s) and 
solution(s). 
 
B6.1.7.1.7. Make simple generalizations based on the main 
ideas and key details of a text 
 
 Have learners listen to a story and identify the main ideas 
and key details. 
 Use questions to guide learners to make generalizations 
based on the main ideas and key details. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
162 
Sub-Strand 8: Asking and Answering Questions 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.8.1: Demonstrate 
understanding in asking and 
answering questions 
correctly 
 
 
B6.1.8.1.1.Answer ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ questions correctly 
using the expressions that show the future 
 
 Through discussion, let learners identify an activity 
they will perform at a future time, e.g. tomorrow, 
next month etc. 
 Ask questions to elicit “Yes” or “No” answers e.g. 
Will you come to school tomorrow?  Yes/No; Yes, I 
will/No, I won’t 
 Introduce drills e.g. Questions and Answers Drill, for 
learners to practise asking and answering ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ 
Questions.   
 
Communication and Collaboration 
B6.1.8.2: Identify and use 
question tags correctly in 
speech 
 
B6.1.8.2.1. Use positive tags, negative tags and 
auxiliaries in speech 
 
 Put learners in pairs to ask and answer simple 
questions in turns. 
 Discuss positive tags (e.g. It is cold, isn’t it?) and 
negative tags e.g. It isn’t cold, is it?  
 Demonstrate with learners the usage of positive tags, 
negative tags and auxiliaries in speech. 
 Pair learners to take turns to practise positive tags, 
negative tags and auxiliaries in speech. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
163 
 
 
           Sub-Strand 9: Giving and Following Commands/ Instructions/Directions  
and Making and Responding to Requests 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.9.1: Explore the 
use of verbs in 
commands, 
instructions, requests 
and directions 
appropriately in speech. 
 
 
B6.1.9.1.1. Create and present simple instructions or a 
manual on how to play a game  
 
 Give sample instructions on how to play a game 
 Put learners into convenient groups to study and discuss 
the instructions. 
 Have each group choose a game and create instructions 
on how to play it.    
 Have learners present their work to the class for 
feedback. 
 Learners role-play 
 
B6.1.9.1.2. Make and respond to polite requests for help 
from unfamiliar people 
 
 Discuss requests e.g. as an act of asking politely or 
formally for something. 
 Demonstrate making polite requests with two or three 
learners. 
 Let learners role-play making and responding to polite 
requests. 
 Guide learners with given situations for them to role-play 
making and responding to polite requests for help from 
unfamiliar people. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
Personal Development and Leadership 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
164 
 
Sub-Strand 10: Presentation 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.10.1: Demonstrate 
knowledge of spoken 
grammar and register 
 
 
B6.1.10.1.1. Demonstrate awareness of the features of spoken 
language e.g. the use of modal expressions to convey 
tentativeness e.g. probably, not too sure etc. 
 
 Revise important features of spoken language such as contractions 
and ellipsis (contractions, ellipsis e.g. A: What’s your name? B: Esi 
 Let learners identify these features in their readers, story books, 
etc. 
 Let them engage in pairs and group dialogue on given topics. 
 
B6.1.10.1.2.Demonstrate awareness of the differences between 
spoken and written forms of language (simplicity/complexity of 
sentence structures, formal/informal) 
 
 Lead learners to discover differences between spoken and written 
forms of language. E.g. Formal and informal language: 
"I can't " vs "I cannot" 
 Create situations for learners to practise both formal and informal 
forms. 
 
B6.1.10.1.3.Demonstrate awareness of how meaning is conveyed 
through appropriate pace, stress, tone – through  news reporting 
 
 Revise how meaning is conveyed through appropriate pace, stress 
and tone. 
 Model presenting news or have learners watch news presentation. 
 Put learners into groups to discuss pace, stress and tone of news 
presented. 
Guide learners to prepare and present news on given topics. 
  
Collaboration and Communication 
 
Digital Literacy 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
165 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.10.2: Demonstrate 
the ability  to 
communicate with 
accurate pronunciation 
and appropriate 
intonation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information and 
ideas for a variety of 
purposes  
 
B6.1.10.2.1. Speak at a good pace and with expression 
 Demonstrate a model speech: Choose a familiar topic and 
make a short but moving speech on it. 
 Have learners discuss the speech focusing on its pace and 
expressiveness. 
 Let learners speak on very short and simple topics using 
appropriate voice quality. 
 The class comment on the relevant features. 
 
B6.1.10.2.2. Read aloud clearly, at a good pace and with 
expression 
 Give a model reading by reading a short texts aloud. 
 Have pupils read aloud in pairs and in small groups. 
 Let them write and read out short speeches on given topics in 
groups. 
Groups may read out their speeches to the class. 
 
B6.1.10.3.1. Research and deliver speeches on given 
informational topics 
 Have learners select topics of interest from informational 
texts read. 
 Help learners to identify the purpose and audience of sample 
speeches. 
 Have learners visit the library to research and plan their 
speeches. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration  
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
166 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.10.1: Demonstrate 
knowledge of spoken 
grammar and register 
 
 
B6.1.10.1.1. Demonstrate awareness of the features of spoken 
language e.g. the use of modal expressions to convey 
tentativeness e.g. probably, not too sure etc. 
 
 Revise important features of spoken language such as contractions 
and ellipsis (contractions, ellipsis e.g. A: What’s your name? B: Esi 
 Let learners identify these features in their readers, story books, 
etc. 
 Let them engage in pairs and group dialogue on given topics. 
 
B6.1.10.1.2.Demonstrate awareness of the differences between 
spoken and written forms of language (simplicity/complexity of 
sentence structures, formal/informal) 
 
 Lead learners to discover differences between spoken and written 
forms of language. E.g. Formal and informal language: 
"I can't " vs "I cannot" 
 Create situations for learners to practise both formal and informal 
forms. 
 
B6.1.10.1.3.Demonstrate awareness of how meaning is conveyed 
through appropriate pace, stress, tone – through  news reporting 
 
 Revise how meaning is conveyed through appropriate pace, stress 
and tone. 
 Model presenting news or have learners watch news presentation. 
 Put learners into groups to discuss pace, stress and tone of news 
presented. 
Guide learners to prepare and present news on given topics. 
  
Collaboration and Communication 
 
Digital Literacy 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
167 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information and 
ideas for a variety of 
purposes  
CONT’D  
B6.1.10.3.2. Draw on prior knowledge to identify subject matter 
and organizational structure of speech 
 
 Help learners to draw on their prior knowledge about speech 
making.  For instance, ensure that learners know the roles of 
participants, facilitators, advisors and time-keepers in the group. 
 Learners must be conversant with subject matter and the 
(organizational) structure of their speech. 
 Guide learners to choose their own topics for speech. 
 
 
B6.1.10.3.3.Gather and select facts and ideas from one or 
multiple print and/ or non-print sources, appropriate to the 
purpose, audience, context and culture 
 Through discussion, let learners generate ideas and details 
appropriate to the purpose, audience, context and culture on 
given topics. 
 Provide model speeches (e.g. downloaded from the internet) for 
discussion. These will help learners to generate ideas for their 
speeches. 
 Guide the learners to download important speeches from the 
internet.  
Discuss the organizational structure of the speeches with them. 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration  
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration  
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
168 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.10.3: Plan and 
present information and 
ideas for a variety of 
purposes  
CONT’D 
B6.1.10.3.4.Support ideas and points of view with concrete 
examples to convey meaning appropriate to purpose and 
context.  
Provide sample speech topics 
 Through discussion, guide learners to select facts and ideas 
from one or more sources such as print sources and non-
print sources appropriate to the purpose, audience context 
and culture. 
 
B6.1.10.3.5.Identify and use the appropriate register for 
formal and informal contexts 
 Present sample speeches to groups to study. 
 Provide topics and guide learners to identify related key 
vocabulary. 
 
B6.1.10.3.6. Elaborate on points using experiences and 
feelings 
 Provide topics and lead class discussions to: 
 generate ideas. 
 expand the points with such details such as facts, 
examples, explanations and personal experiences. 
 Learners repeat the activity in pairs and in groups. 
 
B6.1.10.3.7.Speak with confidence before different audiences 
using appropriate verbal and non-verbal cues to convey 
meaning 
 Through discussion, explain the need to be able to speak with 
confidence before an audience.  
 Show video clips of well-known persons delivering speeches 
for learners to observe and comment on. 
Let learners practise these in pairs and groups. 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration  
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
169 
Strand 2: Reading 
Sub-Strand 2: Phonics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.2.1: Connect 
sounds to letters; and 
blend letters/syllables in 
order to read and write 
 
B6.2.2.1.1. Read words with ending sounds like  "sure" as in 
measure; "ture" as in creature and "tch"  as in Stretch 
 
 Use word games to introduce words with ending sounds like  
"sure" as in measure; "ture" as in creature and "tch"  as in Stretch. 
 Guide learners to play the Pick and Read game to practise 
reading the target words. 
 Have groups write sentences with the target words and read out 
the sentences to the class. 
 
B6.2.2.1.2. Read ccvcc, cccvc words and multisyllabic words 
when reading continuous texts. 
 
 Provide texts having multisyllabic words for regular practise by 
learners 
 Model the production of  the ccvcc and the cccvc words 
 Ask learners to repeat the ccvcc and the cccvc words after you 
while you check in correct discrepancies in the pronunciation of 
the words.  
e.g. : 
ccvcc words - trust, striped etc. 
cccvc words - scrap, sprite etc. 
Multisyllabic words - communication, immediate etc. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
170 
Sub-Strand 3: Word Families, minimal pairs and Common Digraphs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.3.1: Identify  
minimal pairs and 
common digraphs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.2.3.1: Identify 
rhyming/endings words 
and common digraphs 
 
B6.2.3.1.1. Use common minimal pairs to decode words  
 Give examples of minimal pairs 
 Using “think-pair-share”, let learners come up with more 
examples of minimal pairs. 
E.g.  
 
Two sounds 
difference 
One sound 
difference 
goat, coat, boat,  
   Wall, ball  
   train, chain 
   Bridge, fridge 
road, loan 
 
 
 Introduce and revise these and other similar spelling 
patterns using examples (two or three patterns at a time). 
 Drill the pronunciation of the sounds. 
 Have learners read several words having the spelling 
pattern. 
 Let learners also read the words in context. 
 
B6.2.3.1.2. Use words with digraphs to make meaningful 
sentences 
 Have learners identify words having specific digraphs and 
form meaningful sentences with the words. 
              e.gs. of digraphs: 
 
ch-chair                             ck-duck 
ph- phone ng- sting                             
sh- ship                                qu- queen 
wh-whale                          
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
171 
Sub-Strand 4: Diphthongs 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.4.1: Identify and 
use diphthongs  to 
decode texts 
B6.2.3.1.1. Use words with centering diphthongs  ( e.g. / iǝ, 
eǝ, Ʊǝ ) to make meaningful sentences 
 In a discussion have learners talk about diphthongs.  
 Give several examples and elicit examples from them. 
/iǝ/ - fear, ear, near, clear 
 /eǝ/ - prepare, there, stairs 
 /Ʊǝ/ - pure, secure 
 Have learners use words with diphthongs in meaningful 
sentences. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
172 
 
 
Sub-Strand 5: Blends and Consonant Clusters 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.5.1: Identify and 
use consonant blends 
and clusters  in reading 
 
B6.2.5.1.1.Orally produce three-syllable words by blending 
sounds (phonemes), including consonant blends 
 Revise consonant blends and clusters using several spelling 
patterns e.g. bl, br, cl, cr, gl, gr, spr, scr, str, chr 
 Drill their pronunciation in isolation and in words 
 Learners work in groups to identify and list words having the 
blends and clusters. 
 Have learners read the words in isolation and in context 
 
 
B6.2.5.1.2. Use the spelling-sound correspondences for 
common consonant digraphs 
 In a discussion talk about digraphs as a whole class, group 
and in pairs. 
 Have learners try to establish some rules in forming and 
spelling words having digraphs. 
              e.g. ch as in church 
sh as in shirt 
gh as in tough 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
173 
Sub-Strand 6: Vocabulary 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.6.1: Understand 
word meanings and 
usages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.2.6.2:Build 
vocabulary 
 
B6.2.6.1.1.Use level-appropriate content words (nouns, verbs, 
adjectives and adverbs) and function words (prepositions) 
appropriately in spoken and written communication 
 Using examples, explain simply the two groups of words. 
 Elicit sentences and have learners identify the two categories of 
words from their sentences. 
 Have sentences on sentence strips on the board or cardboards 
and have learners identify the function words and content 
words. 
 Have learners make meaningful sentences on their own and 
share with peers or in groups. 
 
B6.2.6.1.2. Use the following terms:  compound words, idiom, 
simile, synonym, antonym, pre-fix, suffix, phrasal verb etc. in 
spoken and written expressions 
 Introduce the terms one at a time using several examples. 
 Let learners identify the terms in the texts and stories they 
read. 
 Have learners use idioms, similes, compound words, synonyms, 
antonyms etc. in meaningful sentences. 
 
B6.2.6.2.1. Develop a rich vocabulary stock through extensive 
reading of age-appropriate text; substituting selected nouns 
verbs and adjectives in a text with synonyms /near synonyms. 
 Have learners regularly play several vocabulary games such as 
“Word hunt”, “Lucky Dip”, “I know it”, etc. 
Let them build a portfolio on vocabulary and use them in meaningful 
sentences. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
174 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.6.3: Demonstrate 
a rich vocabulary that 
supports the 
development of 
listening, reading, 
speaking, writing and 
presentation skills 
 
 
B6.2.6.3.1. Deduce meaning of words from how they relate to 
one another 
e.g.  Hyponyms – fruits   – apple 
         Meronyms – hand – finger  
  
Meaning from context 
 Explain and demonstrate that the meaning of words can be 
deduced from other words in its environment. 
E.g. Philip is glad.  
        He is really happy. 
Aku is tall but her brother is short. 
 
 Put learners in groups. Let them read a text and l give the 
contextual meaning of selected words from the text. 
 Engage learners in activities such as: 
 Matching words with their 
meanings/synonyms/antonyms. 
 Reading a text and finding replacements for certain 
words in the text. 
 Using other strategies such as the synonym or antonym tree 
or synonym or antonym ‘bingo’, have learners build a portfolio 
of antonyms and synonyms. 
 
Meaning from word relationships 
hyponyms: fruit - apple 
meronyms: hand - finger  
 Have learners use the vocabulary tree and mother to child to 
build words using hyponyms and meronyms. 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
175 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.6.4: Use words 
appropriately for 
purpose, audience, 
context and culture 
B6.2.6.4.1. Recognise how words are formed through 
compounding  
 
Have learners refresh their knowledge on affixes – prefixes and 
suffixes - , acronyms and blending using examples. 
 Learners choose words with given affixes and use them 
appropriately in sentences. 
 Introduce compound words in context and have learner 
identify their components. E.g. breakfast = break, fast; 
classroom = class, room. 
 Put learners into groups to build more compound words.  
 
B6.2.6.4.2.Recognise the playful use of words in spoken and 
written language (jokes, riddles, puns) 
 
 Introduce these one at a time. 
 Provide and discuss examples. 
 Learners play games with the activity in pairs/groups. 
 
B6.2. 6.4.3.Use words suitable for purpose, audience, context 
and culture in relation to: type of texts 
(exposition/explanation, persuasive language, argumentative), 
medium (spoken/written), register (formal/informal) etc. 
 Choose appropriate texts to guide learners identify the key 
elements in writing.  E.g. purpose, audience, setting, 
characters, etc. 
Have them role play a simple story to bring out the importance of 
these elements and their usage. 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Communication and Collaboration 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
176 
Sub-Strand 7: Comprehension 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.7.1: Process and 
comprehend level 
appropriate texts 
 
B6.2.7.1.1. Construct meaning from texts 
 Select level-appropriate texts for learners. 
 Based on background knowledge and other factors, have 
learners predict what a text will be about and actively 
adjust comprehension while reading/viewing or listening. 
 Learners connect their background knowledge to help 
them make meaning of the text as they read. 
 Assist learners with a variety of questions to make meaning 
during and after reading the text.   
 Lay emphasis on the need to use the environment of a 
word to get its meaning. 
 
B6.2.7.1.2. Note and recall main ideas in sequence 
 Guide learners to present facts and ideas in a sequential 
order.  You could also adopt other strategies like the 
SQ3R. 
 
SQ3R strategy 
Have learners: 
S – Survey the text- (learners skim by going through the chapter, 
note heading/sub-heading and other features.  
Q – Question – generate questions about the content of the text. 
 
3R 
Read – read for more information. 
Recite – retrieve information from text. 
Review – go over the main ideas in the text to consolidate 
understanding 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Reading  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
177 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.7.1: Process and 
comprehend level 
appropriate texts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.2.7.2: Apply critical 
reading, implied 
meaning, higher order 
thinking, judgment and 
evaluation 
 
B6.2.7.1.3.Scan/skim for details 
 Use texts to guide learners to grasp the main ideas as they 
skim/scan in 3-4 minutes and have them present their points for 
class discussion. 
 
Note: This must be a regular feature of reading and comprehension 
lessons. 
 
B6.2.7.1.4. Read level- appropriate texts silently and closely for 
comprehension 
 
Give frequent and regular practice in silent and close reading using the 
Directed Reading Activity (DRA) strategy. 
 
 
B6.2.7.2.1. Respond to a text with reason, simple judgment 
and personal interpretations 
 
 Have learners read a short text. 
 Learners create a mental image from the text read.  (This 
visualization will help bring life to the text for learners to 
interpret and give their opinion and personal interpretation to 
the write up). 
 Lead a discussion of each text read with questions. Questions 
should elicit : 
 Factual information 
 Implied meaning 
 Judgment 
 Evaluation 
 Personal Response 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Reading  
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
178 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.7.2: Apply critical 
reading, implied 
meaning, higher order 
thinking, judgment and 
evaluation 
CONT’D 
 
 
B6.2.7.3: Demonstrate 
understanding of  the 
use of words and 
phrases as used in the 
text 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.2.8.1: construct 
meaning from text read 
 
B6.2.7.2.2. Compare and contrast two or more events in a text 
 Put learners into groups to identify, compare and contrast two or 
more events within a text or in different texts read or heard. 
 They may also compare and contrast other elements like 
characters and setting. 
 
 
B6.2.7.2.3. Demonstrate awareness of the structure of texts 
(e.g. introduction, body, conclusion) 
 Guide learners systematically using given narrative texts to 
identify the introduction body and conclusion in it.  
 Have learners summarize each of these parts and make a 
summary of the whole text using their part summaries.  
 
B6.2.7.3.1. Determine the contextual meaning of words and 
phrases. 
 Select a text for reading. Identify words and phrases and 
systematically, guide learners to work out their meanings in 
context. 
 Put learners into groups and give each group a set of words and 
phrases to find their meanings. Each group presents its work. 
B6.2.8.1.1. Read silently and reasonably for meaning from a 
level-appropriate text 
 Have learners stop and think about the text and know what to do 
when meaning is not clear. By setting a target in the text for 
them.  
 Have them read silently and at a reasonable pace for the meaning 
from the text. 
 Direct learners’ reading with “While Reading” questions. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Reading  
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
179 
Sub-Strand 8: Silent Reading 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.8.1: construct 
meaning from text read 
CONT’D 
B6.2.8.1.2. Find meaning of words as used in context 
 Have learners play vocabulary games that involve meaning 
and usage of words. E.g. Lucky Dip, Fishing. 
B6.2.8.1.3. Ask and answer questions based on a passage 
read 
 Prepare learners adequately before reading activities. E.g. 
Discussion of background knowledge, title and 
accompanying pictures of the reading text, prediction. 
 Provide “While-reading” questions. 
 Have learners read the text silently. 
Assign learners to answer a variety of questions based on 
the text e.g. factual, inferential and applicative questions.  
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking 
 
  
Sub-Strand 9: Fluency 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.9.1: Read fluently to 
enhance comprehension 
 
B6.2.9.1.1.Read grade- level text with meaning 
Use the three-stage approach (Before Reading, While Reading, and 
After Reading) for learners to prepare adequately and read texts and 
provide adequate follow-up activities. 
 Use who, what, where, when, why and how of an event 
organizer to guide learners to adequately discuss the text and 
respond to questions on it. 
  
B6.2.9.1.2. read aloud with expressions that reflect the 
author’s purpose and meaning. 
 Have learners read texts independently paying attention to 
punctuation marks, words, sentences and paragraphs. Learners 
use self-correction, word recognition and re-reading strategies 
to confirm comprehension. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
180 
Sub-Strand 10: Summarizing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.10.1: Read and 
summarize passages 
read 
 
B6.2.10.1.1. Summarize  level- appropriate passages/text orally 
 Learners identify the most important ideas and restate them in 
their own words. 
 Begin from sentences and short paragraphs. 
E.g.  
Sentence: This is the boy who killed the snake. 
  Summary: The boy killed the snake. 
 
 Lead learners with questions to do this. 
E.g. What did you learn from this text? 
 
B6.2.10.1.2. Write short summary of a level appropriate 
passage/text read 
 Have learners read the passage. 
 Discuss it briefly with learners. 
 Working in groups, learners write a summary of the passage taking 
note of the main idea(s). 
 Let learners present their write up for discussion. 
 
E.g. Select main ideas from the passage without 
examples/illustrations/words in parenthesis. 
 Learners use the sequence order to write down the events that 
took place in the correct order. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
181 
 
Strand 3: Grammar Usage at Word and Phrase Levels 
Sub-Strand 1: Nouns   
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
B6.3.1.1.1.Identify and use nouns or noun phrases to describe 
conditions. 
 
B6.3.1.1.2. Identify and use:  
                         - proper nouns to refer to 
organisations/events; 
                  -  Count/non-count  
 Singular 
 Plural (regular, irregular) 
  without plural marker 
 
 Revise all the types of nouns (refer to B1-B5). 
 Provide learners with opportunities to further practise using 
these nouns. 
 
e.g.  
a. Learners take their reading books and identify and make a 
list of these nouns, use them in sentences and present their 
work to the class for feedback class. 
b. Use a language drill to help learners do practice activities. 
 
e.g. Pair Drill for singular/plural nouns 
 Learner “A” gives a noun- mango 
 Learner “B” gives its plural form “mangoes” and uses it 
in a sentence- I love mangoes.  
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
182 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.1.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
CONT’D 
c. Learners play the “Lucky Dip game” for practice. 
Learners take turns to dip their hands into a box containing words of 
collective nouns, pick a card and use the word in a sentence. 
 e.g. a team of horses, a bevy of ladies, a flock of sheep 
 
 d. Learners can look for types of nouns using the internet and use 
them in sentences. 
 
Provide further practice activities to build on learners' knowledge on 
nouns. 
B6.3.1.1.3. Use  "- ing"  nouns  and noun phrases to refer to 
activities 
E.g. I enjoy singing. 
         I like swimming. 
 
B6.3.1.1. 4. Identify and use abstract nouns to refer to 
concepts and ideas 
 Revise abstract nouns with learners 
 Have learners identify abstract nouns in texts and these 
nouns in sentences e.g. intelligence, knowledge, idea, patience 
i. I admire Ama because of her patience. 
He appears to have a good knowledge. 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Communication and Collaboration 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
183 
Sub-Strand2: Determiners 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6. 3.2.1:  Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of determiners in 
communication 
 
B6. 3.2.1.1. Identify and use definite and indefinite articles 
 Briefly revise nouns. Learners read/listen to a passage having 
several nouns. 
 Have them identify the nouns stating their types. 
 Learners identify the nouns noting words that precede them e. g. 
the, an 
 Select sentences containing nouns and articles and use them to 
explain the use of the articles “a”, “an” and “the” simply. 
 In groups, learners write sentences and underline the articles. 
  
B6.3.2. 1.2.Identify and use quantifiers. 
 ordinal first, second etc. 
 Some, few/little etc. 
 No/both, all each/every 
 Another, other 
 Fewer, less, etc. 
 Revise nouns and articles briefly 
 Introduce quantifiers in context. Learners listen to or read a text 
having several quantifiers. 
 Learners identify the nouns and the words that go with them 
(quantifiers) 
 Elicit examples from learners. 
 In pairs, one says a sentence containing a qualifier/quantifier and 
the other identifies the quantifiers. Role(s) are reversed. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
184 
  
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6. 3.2.1:  Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of determiners in 
communication 
CONT’D 
B6.3.2.1.3. Identify and use possessive pronouns to show 
possession 
 
 Revise personal pronouns by having learners identify them in 
sentences and use them in sentences of their own. 
 Introduce possessive pronouns in context. 
E.g. 
i. I gave my book to Mary. 
ii. She sold her phone. 
 
 Learners listen to or read a passage containing several 
possessives (my, your, his, hers, its). 
 Ask them to identify words that show or indicate possession. 
 List words on the board and elicit others. 
 Have learners play a game e.g. the “Fishing Game” with cards 
bearing possessive pronouns. They read the word on the card 
and use it in a sentence. 
 
B6.3.2.1.4. Identify and use demonstratives: this/that, 
these/those -concepts and ideas. 
 Briefly revise nouns and articles by having learners identify them 
in sentences. 
 Provide a text having the demonstratives with emphasis on the 
demonstratives (this, that, these, those). Read it out. 
 List the demonstratives and have learners read out and observe 
the use of the demonstratives in the sentences. 
Working in small groups, each group writes a number of 
sentences with each of the demonstratives introduced. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
Critical thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
185 
 
Sub-Strand 3: Pronouns 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of  different 
types of  pronouns in 
communication 
 
B6.3.3.1.1. Identify and use:  
 
- Reflexive pronouns to emphasis that an objects of a 
verb is the same person as the subject e.g. myself, 
yourself etc. 
- Relative pronouns to link ideas or add information to a 
noun or a noun phrase e.g. which, where, whose etc. 
- Reciprocal pronouns e.g. each other, one another 
 
 Use a text to revise the different pronouns learnt in B1-B5. 
 Introduce reflexive pronouns with examples in sentences. 
 Discuss the reflexive pronouns with learners. 
 Provide a passage and group learners to identify reflexive 
pronouns, and use the pronouns identified in sentences. 
 Repeat the procedure to teach relative and reciprocal 
pronouns. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
186 
Sub-Strand 4: Adjectives 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.4.1: Apply the 
knowledge of adjectives 
in communication 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.3.4.1.1. Use comparatives forms of regular and irregular 
adjectives to make comparisons  
e.g.      regular: fastest 
             irregular: better 
                    
 Revise the comparatives with learners. 
 Use practical activities to guide learners to change the positive 
forms of regular adjectives into comparative forms by adding -
er.   
E.g.  Compare the heights of two learners: 
i. Musah is tall. Safianu is short. 
ii. Musah is taller than Safianu. 
 
 Guide learners to form the superlative forms of regular 
adjectives by adding -est. 
E.g. Ali is the tallest. 
 
 Provide a text containing irregular forms of adjectives. Start with 
those that have different spelling for comparative and 
superlative. 
e.g. good      better      best 
 
 Provide a text for learners to identify the examples. Learners 
use the irregular forms of adjectives in sentences 
 Assist learners  to use the adjectival forms position, more – and 
most –  
much                          more                               most 
intelligent          more intelligent           most intelligent 
 
 For each type or form, guide learners with examples to compare 
classroom objects and things within the vicinity of the school and 
beyond. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
187 
Sub-Strand 5: Verbs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
 
 
B6.3.5.1.1. Use different types of verbs 
 Main verb and Helping verb (primary auxiliary and 
modal auxiliary) 
 
 Revise verbs generally. Have learners identify verbs in sentences 
and use them in their own sentences. 
- Helping verb (primary auxiliary and modal auxiliary E.g. can 
might, would, ought, is, are, is, are, was, were). 
 Choose a text (story) and have the learners work in groups to 
identify the main verbs. Let each group select five of the verbs 
and use them in sentences. 
 Introduce auxiliaries (primary and modal) in context one at a time. 
Learners listen to/read a text having several of them. 
 Guide learners with examples to identify and distinguish them from the 
main verbs and use them in sentences. 
 
B6.3.5.1.2 Use appropriate subject-verb agreement  (indefinite 
pronouns, Singular/plural and Collective nouns 
 
 Revise subject-verb agreement concept learners have learnt in B4 and 
B5 by writing examples of sentences on the board and discussing them 
with learners. 
 Have groups of learners discuss and exemplify the following: 
- A singular subject goes with a singular verb. 
- A plural subject goes with a plural verb. 
- A collective subject goes with singular or plural verb. 
 Present a text. Put the class into groups to identify sentences 
showing subject –verb agreement involving Indefinite pronouns 
as subjects. Each group presents its work. 
 Conduct suitable drills for learners to have practice. Learners sit 
in groups to converse on a topic. E.g. “What the people in my 
family do daily”. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
188 
 CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
CONT’D 
 
 
B6.3.5.1.3. Use different forms of verbs: 
- Irregular 
- Infinitive to talk about personal activities 
               E.g.: I asked my friend to read the story. 
B6.3.5.1.4. Use the simple present form of verbs in sentences:  
  For scheduled future actions. 
 for future possibilities or plans 
 Revise the simple present in context. 
 Present an on-going situation to learners for them to    
        report on it.   E.g. A football game/match. 
 
 Present similar situations for learners to describe using the 
simple present, in groups. 
 Groups may write and present their work to the class. 
 Use texts/sentences to introduce the use of the simple present 
for:  
 scheduled future actions  -   
E.g. The bus leaves early tomorrow. 
 future possibilities or plans 
e.g. If he doesn't come early, we shall go without him 
 
B6.3.5.1.4. Use the simple present form of verbs in sentences: 
  
  For scheduled future actions. 
 for future possibilities or plans 
 Revise the simple present in context. 
 Present an on-going situation to learners for them to    
        report on it.  E.g. A football game/match. 
 
 Present similar situations for learners to describe using the 
simple present, in groups. 
 Groups may write and present their work to the class. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
189 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.5.1: Apply the 
knowledge of verbs in 
communication 
CONT’D 
 Use texts/sentences to introduce the use of the simple present 
for:  
 scheduled future actions  -   
E.g. The bus leaves early tomorrow. 
 future possibilities or plans 
               e.g. If he doesn't come early, we shall go without him 
 
B6.3.5.1.6. Use the past continuous form of verbs to talk about 
actions/events which were going on when a second one took 
place 
 
e.g.  We were playing football when the fire broke out. 
 
B6.3.5.1.7. Use the imperative form of verb to give warning and 
express prohibitions  
E.g.   Break the glass, and you will pay for it. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
190 
 
Sub-Strand 6: Adverbs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS5 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.6.1: Apply the 
knowledge of different 
types of adverbs in 
communication 
 
B6.3.6.1.1. Use adverbs to express degree and reason 
 
 Revise adverbs of time and manner in context: Have learners 
listen to/ read several sentences containing adverbs of time 
and manner. 
 Use drills and games to provide practice in using adverbs of 
time. 
E.g. Game: Lucky Dip 
        Drill: Substitution Table Drill 
 Learners sit in groups to discuss issues involving use of 
adverbs of time. 
 Repeat the procedure to introduce adverbs of degree and 
reason. e.g. 
 
Degree: The shirt is too small for me. You are making so 
much noise. 
Reason: I sing because I like singing. 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
191 
 
Sub-Strand 7: Idiomatic Expressions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.7.1: Understand and 
use idiomatic expressions 
appropriately in speech 
and in writing 
 
 
B6.3.7.1.1. identify, explain and use idiomatic expressions 
correctly. 
 
 Revise idiomatic expressions in context to guide learners identify 
their meanings. 
               E.g.  
i. Take after (to resemble) 
ii. To pull down(to destroy the reputation of someone) 
 
 Together with learners, identify and write some 
familiar/common idiomatic expressions from learners’ culture.  
Then introduce other idiomatic expressions from the native 
language.  
         E.g. 
i. Take after (to resemble) 
ii. To pull down(to destroy the reputation of someone) 
 
 With examples from the dictionary, help learners write idioms 
and their explanations. 
 Provide a few idiomatic expressions and let learners interpret 
them. 
 Have groups of learners write idioms and their meanings on 
manila cards to hang in the classroom for a while. 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
192 
Sub-Strand 8: Conjunctions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.8.1:  Apply the 
knowledge of 
conjunctions in speech 
and in writing  
B6.3.8.1.1. Identify and use simple conjunctions - so that, when, 
while, if etc. to:  
- show purpose 
- express time 
- condition, etc. 
 
 Revise the coordinating conjunctions – and, or, nor, but and 
subordinating conjunctions by having learners use them 
sentences. 
 Provide sentences for learners to join them with coordinating 
and subordinating conjunctions. 
 Provide passages and let learners identify conjunctions. 
 Let them do other activities like filling blanks with suitable 
conjunctions and using conjunction in their own sentences. 
 Introduce the conjunctions "so that, when, while, if etc" in 
context. 
e.g. Take a hot bath so that you can sleep well. 
I drank the soup while my mother was in the kitchen. 
 Provide opportunities for learners to use the conjunctions 
learnt. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
193 
 
Sub-Strand 9: Modals 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.9.1: Apply the 
knowledge of modals in 
speech and in writing  
CONT’D 
B6.3.9.1.1. Use modals to express a variety of meanings 
 
 Revise modal auxiliaries. 
- Can: conveys ability 
- May: asks for permission, expresses politeness, possibility 
- Must: obligation or compulsion, necessity 
- Shall/will: prediction, intention, determination etc. 
- Could: tentativeness, politeness 
- Would: politeness etc. 
- Might: possibility 
- Should: obligation 
- Used to: for past activity/event 
- Have to/ought to/need to:  for obligation 
 
 Introduce them in context one or two at a time.  
 With examples, assist learners to use the modals in sentences 
to convey specific meanings such as politeness. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
194 
Sub-Strand 10: Prepositions 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.10.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
prepositions in oral and 
written communication 
 
 
B6.3.10.1.1. Use prepositions to convey a variety of 
meanings: 
 Time 
 Purpose 
 Possession 
 Comparison e.g. taller than 
 Support or opposition  
      e.g. for you, 
              against you 
 
 Revise prepositions such as those that convey meanings of 
position, time, direction, possession and comparison.  Write 
examples of sentences to illustrate this. 
 Have learners identify common prepositions (on, in, near, 
under) in sentences. Let them use these prepositions in 
sentences. 
 Introduce prepositions that show support or opposition in 
context. E.g. for you, against you. Let them identify these 
prepositions in texts they have read e.g. reading passages, 
stories, etc. 
 Learners now write their own sentences with the 
prepositions. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
195 
Sub-Strand 11: Adjective Phrases 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.11.1: show 
understanding of 
adjective phrases in 
oral and written 
communication. 
 
B6.3.11.1.1. Form and use adjective phrases correctly  
                        e.g. this is a very beautiful flower. 
 
 Revise adjective in context by having learners identify them in 
sentences and use them in their own sentences. 
 Introduce the adjective phrase as a grammatical structure with 
the adjective as head.   
 
Note: The adjective phrase can be a single adjective or more.  
 
E.g. a beautiful house, a strong African oven. 
 
 Provide sentences with adjective phrases and let learners 
identify the adjective phrases. 
 In groups, learners form adjective phrases and use the phrases 
in sentences. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
Sub-Strand 12: Adverb Phrases 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.12.1: show 
understanding of 
adverb phrases in oral 
and written 
communication. 
 
B6.3.12.1.1. Form and use adverb phrases correctly. E.g.  He 
comes to the house everyday   
 Revise adverbs of manner, place and time. 
 Introduce the adverb phrase in context and get learners to 
understand that an adverb phrase is a grammatical structure 
that modifies a verb.  It is usually a single word or more than a 
single word. 
 Provide several examples in context for learners to read out. 
 Provide short texts for learners to identify the adverb phrases. 
 Let learners use the adverb phrases in sentences. 
E.g. He comes to the house every day. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
196 
 
Sub-Strand 13: Direct and Reported Speech 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.13.1: show 
understanding of direct 
and reported speeches 
in oral and written 
communication. 
 
B6.3.13.1.1. Form and use reported speech appropriately 
 Revision: Provide situations for learners to identify and use 
them in both present and past tenses. 
 Introduce the direct speech with several examples of sentences. 
E.g. 
“We saw an eagle,” said Aba. 
“Esi is tired,” said Mum. 
“Joe has become rich,” said Atongo. 
 Lead learners, with examples, to change direct speech into 
reported speech by: 
i. Introducing a reporting clause 
              E.g.  
a. Aba said that ............... 
b. Mum said that.............. 
c. Atongo said that.......... 
ii. Introducing “that” and completing the sentences. 
E.g. 
a. Aba said that they had seen an eagle. 
iii. Removing the quotation marks. 
E.g. 
b. Mum said that Esi was tired. 
 
 Put learners in pairs.  Let one produce direct speech and let the 
other change it into reported speech. Let them change over 
after some time. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal  
 
Development and Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
197 
 
Strand 4: Writing 
Sub-Strand 2: Penmanship and Handwriting 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.2.1: Copy and 
rewrite sentences 
correctly 
B6.4.2.1.1 Write with a legible, fluent and personal 
handwriting style 
 
 Have learners select sentences from their readers. 
 As learners observe, demonstrate the activity by writing the 
sentences in joint script on the board. 
 Have individual learners read out the sentences. 
 Let learners copy the sentences into their exercise books. 
 Have pupils share their work with their partners. 
 
B6.4.2.1.2. Write complex sentences clearly and correctly 
 
 Revise simple and compound sentences. 
 Introduce the complex sentence structure by combining pairs 
of simple sentences. 
E.g. You will come. We will go. 
        When you come, we will go. 
 Elicit several such sentences from learners. 
 Put learners into groups to identify complex sentences from 
texts they have read. 
 Have learners copy complex sentences into their exercise 
books. 
  
Critical Thinking 
 
Communication Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
198 
Sub-Strand 6: Paragraph Development 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.6.1: Develop, 
organize and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing and representing 
for a variety of purposes, 
audience, and contexts 
CONT’D 
B6.4.6.1.1. Choose appropriate ways and modes of writing for 
a variety of purposes, audience, and contexts, and organise 
facts, ideas and/ or points of view in a way appropriate to the 
mode of delivery, using appropriate text features 
 
 Work with learners to select sample texts from a variety of 
models of writing from learners’ readers and Teacher’s 
resources e.g. newspapers, magazines etc.  You may take 
learners to the library for this exercise.  
Examples of modes of writing. 
(a) Process 
(b) Narrative 
(c) Descriptive 
(d) Persuasive 
(e) Argumentative 
(f) Letter 
 
Note:  Present one mode of writing at a time and at different times 
(in different lessons). 
 
 Put learners into small groups and assign each group a mode of 
writing. 
 Have learners study the sample text. 
 Guide them through appropriate questions to identify the: 
i. Mode of writing/types of essay 
ii. Purpose 
iii. Audience 
 
 Jumble the paragraphs and have learners re-arrange the 
paragraphs into a coherent piece. 
iv. Encourage learners to use search engines to search for the 
different modes of writing they have studied. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and  
Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
solving 
 
Writing  

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
199 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.6.1: Develop, 
organize and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing and 
representing for a 
variety of purposes, 
audience, and contexts 
 
 
B6.4.6.1.2 use key words, phrases or clauses to introduce the 
main idea in the paragraph. 
 
 Display a Model Paragraph. 
 Put  learners  into  groups  to  read  the  paragraph  and  identify 
what the passage is about or the main idea. 
 Have them identify the sentence that contains the main idea. 
 Let  the  group  identify  the  supporting  ideas  and  what  each 
sentence says about the main idea. 
 Ask each group choose a given topic and write five sentences 
about the topic. 
 
B6.4.6.1.3.Elaborate  on,  explain  and/or  justify  the  main  ideas 
of a paragraph by providing relevant details and examples 
 
 Display a model paragraph. 
 By  way  of  revision,  have  learners  identify  the  main  idea  and 
supporting ideas. 
 Think-Pair-Share: Have pairs of learners discuss why a main 
idea in a paragraph needs elaboration, explanation or examples 
and share their views with peers and the whole class. 
 Give learners a topic sentence for them to elaborate on by 
providing details (explanation/examples). 
E.g.  
Topic sentence: Kofi is a good child. 
 
Communication and  
Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem solving 
 
Writing 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
200 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.6.1: Develop, 
organize and express 
ideas cohesively in 
writing and representing 
for a variety of purposes, 
audience, and contexts 
 
 
 
B6.4.6.1.4. Use cohesive devices pronoun references, 
repeated key terms or grammatical structures to link ideas 
in a paragraph. E.g. use connectors to link contrasting 
ideas. Show results and purpose. 
 
 Display a sample paragraph. 
 Underline the cohesive devices/transitional words.  
 Have learners read the paragraph and discuss with their 
peers what the underlined words are doing in the 
paragraph. 
 Lead them in a general discussion on what the underlined 
words are and their roles in the paragraph.  
E.g.  First, second, third, finally, again, also, and, besides, 
further, in the first place, last, likewise, next, then, too. 
Provide a paragraph and leave out the cohesive devices. 
Have learners complete the paragraph with appropriate 
transitional words. 
 
Communication and  
Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem solving 
 
Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
201 
 
Sub-Strand 9: Writing as a Process 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.9.1: Apply the skills 
and strategies for idea 
generation, selection, 
development, 
organization and revision 
in writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.4.9.2: Develop and 
express ideas coherently 
and cohesively in writing 
 
B6.4.9.1.1.Select a topic of choice on a national issue or 
from  different learning areas, brainstorm ideas and 
organize them before writing 
 
 Scaffold the writing process. 
i. Pre-writing 
 Have learners select and discuss a national issue with 
their partners. 
 Have learners brainstorm to generate as many ideas as 
possible about the topic. 
 Have them organize the ideas into a writing plan using an 
outline, a chart or an appropriate graphic organizer. E.g. 
line diagram 
 
Bush fires 
 
 
Causes                                 Effect(s)                             
Solution(s) 
 
 
B6.4.9.2.1. Develop ideas into a three-paragraph draft 
without considering the writing conventions, linking ideas 
within and across paragraphs with a wider range of 
cohesive devices, e.g. as a result, on the other hand, 
however. 
 
 Put learners into groups to develop their ideas in 
B6.4.9.1.1 into a three- paragraph draft. 
Communication and  
Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem solving 
 
Writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and  
Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem solving 
 
Writing 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
202 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.9.3: Apply 
strategies for improving 
drafts for publishing 
 
B6.4.9.3.1. Review, and revise the draft to produce a coherent 
piece by proposing grammar and vocabulary for 
improvement. 
 
 Have learners review their first draft by reading it slowly and 
critically several times to identify words/expressions that need 
to be cancelled. 
 Guide learners with the questions below: 
i. Are your ideas in order and easy to understand? 
ii. Are all the sentences talking about the main idea of the 
paragraph? 
iii. Are all the paragraphs talking about the topic? 
 Have learners read their partners’ draft and offer suggestions. 
 Encourage learners to make as many changes as are necessary to 
improve their drafts. 
 Have learners make a clean draft for publishing. 
 
B6.4.9.3.2. Edit/proofread draft, checking capitalization, usage, 
punctuation and spelling 
- Have learners pick up their clean draft (Refer to B5 4.3.1) and 
check for conventions. E.g. errors in capitalization, punctuation 
and spelling. 
 
Tips for learners: 
(a) Do my sentences have proper punctuation? E.g. full stop, question 
mark, exclamation mark. 
(b) Have I used commas correctly? 
(c) Do my sentences start with capital letters? 
(d) Have I capitalized proper nouns?  
 Have learners do peer editing. 
 Have them prepare neat final copies. 
 Guide them to proofread the final copies before publishing. 
Communication and  
Collaboration 
 
Critical Thinking and 
  
Problem solving 
 
Writing 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
203 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.9.3: Apply strategies 
for improving drafts for 
publishing 
CONT’D 
B6.4.9.3.3. Publish writing piece for other peers to read and in the 
school magazine. 
 Revise writing as a process. 
 Have learners share their writing with their peers classmates 
and families. 
Encourage learners to type/copy neatly their writing and submit them 
for publication in the class magazine, school magazine/notice board.  
Other places to publish include “The Junior Graphic” or “The Daily 
Graphic” and other print media. 
 
 
Sub-Strand 10: Narrative Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.9.3: Apply strategies 
for improving drafts for 
publishing 
B6.4.9.3.1. Review, and revise the draft to produce a 
coherent piece by proposing grammar and vocabulary for 
improvement. 
 Have learners review their first draft by reading it slowly and 
critically several times to identify words/expressions that 
need to be cancelled. 
 Guide learners with the questions below: 
iv. Are your ideas in order and easy to understand? 
v. Are all the sentences talking about the main idea of the 
paragraph? 
vi. Are all the paragraphs talking about the topic? 
 Have learners read their partners’ draft and offer 
suggestions. 
 Encourage learners to make as many changes as are 
necessary to improve their drafts. 
 Have learners make a clean draft for publishing. 
Communication and  
Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
solving 
 
Writing 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
204 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.9.3: Apply 
strategies for improving 
drafts for publishing  
CONT’D 
 
 
B6.4.10.1: Narrate 
situations, express 
feelings and convey 
point of view about the 
world/ or fictional world 
 
B6.4.9.3.2. Edit/proofread draft, checking capitalization, usage, 
punctuation and spelling 
- Have learners pick up their clean draft (Refer to B5 4.3.1) and 
check for conventions. E.g. errors in capitalization, punctuation 
and spelling. 
 
Reflective Writing 
A reflective writing explores who you are now and who you were 
before now.  It focuses on a change you have experienced and reflects 
on how that change makes you unique. 
 Take learners through the writing process. 
 
Then Now chart 
Then Now Reasons for change 
   
   
 
 Use questions to revise: 
Prewriting – strategy 
 
Make a list of how things used to be and how they are now.  Tell why 
they changed. 
Continue with the rest of the process: Writing, Revising, Editing and 
Publishing. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
205 
Sub-Strand 11: Creative/Free Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.11.1: Create  texts B6.4.11.1.1. Write freely about topics of choice on national 
issues and issues from different learning areas. 
 
 Have learners select a topic of their choice on national issues 
and issues from different learning areas. 
 Guide learners to brainstorm and generate ideas. 
 Have learners organize their ideas to write their first draft.  
 They revise their first draft. 
 Learners then, peer edit their work. 
 Have them present their work for class discussion and 
correction. 
 They then write the final draft and display their work for 
their peers to read. 
 
B6.4.11.1.2. Write poems and imaginative narrative stories 
using ideas from poems and imaginative texts read or 
viewed 
 
 Select a narrative text or story to revise the elements of 
narrative: 
- Title 
- Characters 
- Setting 
- Plot/storyline 
- Conflict, dialogue 
 
Collaboration Communication 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
206 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.11.1: Create  texts 
CONT’D 
Note: Through discussion and reference to familiar stories, show 
that: 
 
 Stories have people (characters) who face a problem 
(conflict) in a particular place and time (setting).  They also 
show what people do (action) and say (dialogue) to resolve 
the problem. 
 Discuss a short text to guide learners to go through the 
writing process to write their stories. 
 Put pupils into small groups to plan their writing. 
- Create characters 
- Create conflict 
- Establish a setting 
- Plan action and dialogue 
 They write the first draft, revise, edit and publish their 
writing by following the stages of the writing process. 
 
 
Poems and Plays: Discuss sentences of poems and plays to guide 
learners through the writing process to define their own poems and 
plays. 
 
Collaboration Communication 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Personal  
 
Development and Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
207 
Sub-strand 12: Descriptive Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.12.1: Demonstrate 
knowledge of descriptive 
words/expressions in 
writing 
B6.4.12.1.1. Use descriptive words/sound devices/ figurative 
language to describe events/situations/places/personal 
experiences and events. 
 
 Briefly revise the writing process by having learners name the 
stages and say what happens at each stage. 
 Revise descriptive writing with learners 
 Have learners select a topic e.g. “A Day I will never forget”. 
 Provide a sample text. Guide learners to identify the descriptive 
words and expressions:  
 Discuss the descriptive words and expressions with learners. 
 Put learners into groups and guide them through the writing 
process to describe events/situations/places of their choice and 
personal experiences.  Focus on the use of: 
- Descriptive (adjectives) words. 
- Figurative language e.g. simile – metaphor, personification, sound 
devices 
 
Note: Sensory details are experiences through the senses: sight, 
smell, touch, taste. 
- Sensory details (Allow a reader to visualize a person, a place, a thing or 
an idea). 
 
Collaboration Communication 
 
Critical Thinking and Innovation 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
208 
 
Sub-Strand 13:  Argumentative/Persuasive Writing 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.13.1: Support an 
opinion in writing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.4.13.2: Write 
arguments to support 
claims with clear 
reasons and relevant 
evidence 
 
B6.4.13.1.1 Write explanations and examples to support opinions 
 Present a motion to learners. E. g. A lawyer is more important than 
a doctor. 
 Discuss the meaning and implication of the motion with pupils and 
invite them to take a stand either for or against the motion. 
 Put learners into two groups: for the motion and against the 
motion and write down what they think about it. 
Groups read out their opinions to the class for discussions. 
 
B6.4.13.2.1. Introduce claims and support with clear reasons in 
order of importance and evidence using credible sources and 
demonstrate understanding of the topic or text.  
 Working in groups, learners provide reasons for the opinions they 
hold on a topic. 
 Guide groups to provide evidence for the opinions they hold. 
 Have groups present their work for discussions.  
  
B6.4.13.2.2 Use words, phrases, and clauses to clarify the 
relationships among claim(s) and reasons. 
 Lead learners to discuss appropriate language for arguments e. g. 
use of adjectives in their various forms. 
 You may read out model argumentative essays to guide learners. 
 
B6.4.13.2.3 Establish and maintain a formal style. 
 Using models, discuss the basic structure of an argumentative piece: 
- Introduction. 
- Reasons for the stand taken. 
- Conclusion. 
 Have learners in groups to present full compositions using class 
discussions. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
209 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.13.2: Write 
arguments to support 
claims with clear reasons 
and relevant evidence 
CONT’D 
 
B6.4.13.2.4 Provide a concluding statement that follows from 
argument presented and pose a rhetorical question on the 
topic. 
 Have them go through the writing process to present/state an 
opinion, explain and justify it so as to persuade the reader to 
accept the opinion or point of view. 
 Teach the features of a debate e.g. vocatives, taking a stand etc. 
Put learners in groups and have them select a controversial or 
debatable topic.  Divide the class into two to prepare using the 
writing process as a guide, and to debate on the topic. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
Sub-Strand 14: Expository /Informative Writing 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.4.14.2: Write the 
event of the day 
B6.4.14.1.1. Write short paragraphs to describe incidents. E.g. 
accidents, fire outbreak. 
 Briefly revise the writing process by having learners recall the 
stages and explain the features and relevance of each stage. 
 Have learners select a topic and brainstorm to generate ideas.  
 Put them into groups to organise the points for the development 
of paragraphs. 
 Assign learners to individually develop the points into outlines 
and then into a draft. 
 Let them do self and peer-editing before finally presenting the 
final work. Learners present their finished work in groups. 
 
 
B6.4.14.2.1. Write articles on varied topics 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
210 
Sub-Strand 15: Letter Writing 
 
Content Standards Indicators and Exemplars 
Subject Specific Practices 
and Core Competencies 
B6.4.15.1: Write 
informal letters on 
given topics 
 
B6.4.15.1.1 Write to friends to express their views on given 
topics using appropriate letter formats 
 Discuss the features of informal letters with learners. 
 Give examples of formal letters to them and let them talk 
about the similarities and differences between formal and 
informal letters. 
 Brainstorm to guide learners generate topics they would want 
to write on and let each group choose a topic. 
 Learners identify purpose and audience and make a mind map 
to guide the writing. 
 Each group writes an informal letter and edits it.  The letters 
are passed round the groups for editing. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
Strand 5: Using Writing Conventions/ Grammar Usage 
Sub-Strand 1: Using Capitalisation 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.1.1: Use capital 
letters to start the first 
word in direct speech. 
B6.5.1.1.1. Follow appropriate mechanical convention. 
 Ask individual learners to write a formal letter each on a given 
topic, paying attention to correct use of capital letters, the full 
stop, comma, question mark, exclamation mark, quotation marks, 
apostrophe, hyphen etc. 
Creativity and Innovation 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
211 
Sub-Strand 2: Using Punctuation 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.2.1: Show 
understanding of how 
punctuations are used 
appropriately in writing 
B6.5.2.1.1. Use : 
- the comma  around a phrase for  the modifying  of the 
proceeding noun; 
-  quotation marks to indicate direct speech; 
-  apostrophe to show  plural possession; 
 
 Revise punctuations with learners. 
 Give out samples of relevant texts to groups of learners 
to identify the punctuation marks used. 
e.g. 1. Kofi, my friend, will help me do my homework 
2. I like football," said Ama. 
         3. This is girls' work. 
    4. Mary: Kofi, do you like my pen? 
         Kofi:   Yes, I do. 
 Write a text on the board, leaving out the punctuation marks.  
 Have the whole class punctuate it. 
 Have them study unpunctuated texts individually for a few 
minutes and then re-write the texts using appropriate 
punctuation marks where they have been omitted. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
212 
Sub-Strand 3: Using Naming Words/Nouns 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
B6.5.3.1.1.Identify and use nouns or noun phrases to describe 
conditions.  
 
B6.5.3.1.2. Identify and use: 
                        - proper nouns to refer to organisations/events 
 Count/non-count 
 Singular 
 Plural (regular, irregular) 
 without plural marker 
 Gender 
 
 Revise all the types of nouns with learners (refer to B1-B5). 
 Provide learners with opportunities to further practice using these 
nouns. 
e.g.  
a. Learners take their reading books and identify and make a list of 
these nouns, use them in sentences and present their work to the 
class for feedback. 
b. Use language drills and games to help learners to practice. 
e.g. a pair drill for singular/plural nouns 
 Learner “A” gives a noun- mango 
 Learner “B” gives its plural form “mangoes” and uses it in 
a sentence- I love mangoes. 
 
 Provide further practice activities to build on learners' knowledge 
on nouns. 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
213 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.3.1: Apply 
knowledge of different 
types of nouns in 
communication 
B6. 5.3.1.3. Use the "-ing" nouns to refer to activities. 
e.g. I enjoy singing. 
         I like swimming. 
 
B6.5.3.1.4.Identify and use abstract nouns to refer to concepts 
and ideas. 
 Revise abstract nouns. 
 Have learners identify abstract nouns in texts and use them in 
sentences e.g. intelligence, knowledge, idea, patience 
ii. I admire Ama because of her patience. 
He appears to have a good knowledge of what we are saying 
 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Sub-Strand 4: Using Action Words 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.4.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of verbs 
in everyday language 
B6.5.4.1.1. Differentiate between how the simple past and the 
present perfect tense forms are used in speech and in writing 
 
 Revise the simple present and present perfect tenses by using 
examples and situations. 
 Distribute copies of a sample story and let them identify the 
simple past verbs, how they are used in sentences and identify 
modals used. Use this as a guide to let learners write a story 
using the simple past. 
 Learners in pairs write their own stories making sure they use 
both tense forms. 
 Prepare a grid containing all that could be needed to guide the 
pairs to do their own editing paying attention to the correct use 
both tense. 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
214 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.4.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of verbs in 
everyday language 
CONT’D 
B6.5.4.1.2 Explore the use of the simple past verb form and 
participle form 
 
 Let learners write a story. E.g. about what happened after 
school on Monday. 
 Discuss the essay topic with learners and use the webbing 
strategy to help them write on the chosen topic.  Learners 
write individually. 
 Learners exchange their work for editing as teacher guides 
by focusing on the past verb form and participle form. 
 Assist those whose essays are only in the simple past to 
some in the past participle tense. 
 Learners rewrite their essays incorporating the corrections. 
 Have learners write on another topic individually using the 
simple past verb form as well as the past participle form. 
 
B6.5.4.1.3.Use a range of verb forms in speech and in 
writing. 
 Guide learners, with examples, to form sentences in the past 
perfect tense. Learners narrate a short event using the 
simple past and past perfect tenses. 
 Guide learners with examples to construct sentences using 
the past perfect form of verbs. 
 
E.g. When you came I had already finished the work. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
215 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.4.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of verbs 
in everyday language 
CONT’D 
 
 Let learners narrate short events using both tenses. 
 Let learners write a letter to an elderly relative on something 
that happened in the past.   
 Learners in their groups (mixed ability), choose a topic or 
event they will want to write on using the past perfect and 
simple past tenses. 
 Have learners write a mind map to guide their writing.  
Learners edit their writing at every stage e.g. introduction, 
body and conclusion. 
Encourage them to share their work with other groups. 
 
B6.5.4.1.4. Apply the use of the singular and plural subject 
and the verb forms that go with them. E.g. Let children 
explore the varied usage of the various tenses (simple, 
present perfect, and past perfect) 
 Learners write on a topic using the simple present, present 
perfect and past perfect tenses. 
 Discuss the topic with learners contributing with sentences 
containing the present perfect and past perfect. 
 Let learners write in bits e.g. First start with introduction and 
guide them to edit.  
Learners then write a whole essay on a chosen topic individually 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
216 
 
Sub-Strand 5: Using Qualifying Words-Adjectives 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.5.1: Demonstrate 
understanding of 
adjectives in speech and 
in writing 
CONT’D 
B6.5.5.1.Use superlative forms of regular and irregular 
adjectives to make comparison  
 
Revise adjectives by having learners describe various classroom objects 
and people. 
 Provide samples of texts demonstrating the use of the 
comparative and superlative forms of regular/irregular 
adjectives. 
 Let learners describe various objects using the comparative 
and superlative forms of regular and irregular adjectives. 
 
E.g. The green house is big. The blue house is bigger but the 
yellow one is the biggest. 
 
       Put learners into groups to write short paragraphs      
              containing the three forms of adjectives. 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and  
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
217 
 
Sub-Strand 6: Using Qualifying Words- Adverbs 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.6.1: Understand 
and use adverbs 
correctly in speech and 
in writing 
 
B6.5.6.1.1. Use adverbs to express degree and reason 
 
 Revise adverbs of time and manner in context: Have learners listen to 
and read several sentences containing adverbs of time and manner. 
 Use drills and games to provide practice in using adverbs of time. 
E.g. Game: Lucky Dip 
        Drill: Substitution Table Drill 
 Learners sit in groups to discuss issues involving use of adverbs of time. 
 Repeat the procedure to introduce adverbs of degree and reason. e.g. 
 
Degree: The shirt is too small for me. You are making so much noise. 
Reason: I sing because I like singing. 
 Have groups construct short paragraphs using such adverbs. 
 
Digital Literacy 
 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
218 
Sub-Strand 7: Using Simple Prepositions 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.7.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
prepositions in oral and 
written communication 
 
 
B6.5.7.1.1. Use prepositions to convey a variety of meanings 
 Time 
 Purpose 
 Possession 
 Comparison e.g. taller than 
 Support or opposition for you, against you 
 Revise prepositions such as those that convey meanings of 
position, time, direction, possession and comparison.  Write 
examples of sentences to illustrate this. 
 Have learners identify common prepositions (on, in, near, under) 
in sentences. Let them use these prepositions in sentences. 
 Introduce prepositions that show support or opposition in 
context. E.g. for you, against you. Let them identify these 
prepositions in texts they have read e.g. reading passages, stories, 
etc. 
 Learners now write their own sentences with the prepositions. 
 
 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal  
 
Development and Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
219 
Sub-Strand 8:  Using Conjunctions 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.8.1: Apply the 
knowledge of 
conjunctions in speech 
and in writing 
 
B6.5.8.1.1. Identify and use conjunctions  - so that, when, 
while, if etc. to: 
Show purpose - 
Express time 
Express condition  
 Revise the use of conjunctions learners have learnt in  B4, B5 
and B6 Strand 3, Sub-strand 8 – and, but, or, nor, so that, 
when, while, if, unless etc. to express purpose, time, 
condition etc. 
 Learners write stories on topics of their choice using the 
conjunctions to link ideas in their sentences. 
 Have learners peer-edit one another’s work. 
Personal Development 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
220 
Sub-Strand 9: Using Simple, Compound and Compound Sentences 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.9.1: Apply 
knowledge of 
grammatical rules to 
form words, phrases 
and sentences 
CONT’D 
 
B6.5.9.1.1. Identify subjects and verb in complex  sentences 
 
 Revise nouns and verbs by having learners identify them and use 
them in sentences. 
 Revise simple subjects and predicates in sentences. 
 Elicit sentences from learners and let them identify the subjects 
and predicates of their own sentences. 
 Assign pairs of learners to supply extracts from comprehension 
passages and identify the subjects and predicates of the sentences. 
 Let learners describe an event they had participated in using 
complex sentences. They edit it to demonstrate their knowledge 
of subject and predicate. 
B6.5.9.1.2. Construct complex  sentences correctly 
 
 Review the use of coordinators in sentences. Learners write 
examples of sentences containing coordinators.  
 Let learners join pairs of simple sentences into compound ones. 
 Introduce complex sentences with several examples  
 Elicit similar sentences from learners  
 Have learners change compound sentences into complex ones. 
 In groups learners study extract of reading passages to identify 
complex sentences. 
  
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Critical Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
 
 
 
Personal Development 
 
Creativity and Originality 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Spelling 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
221 
Sub-Strand 10: Spelling 
 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.10.1: Spell words 
accurately 
 
B6.5.10.1.1. Check pieces of literary work for spelling 
 Give learners an extract containing wrongly spelt words. 
Guide them to correct the spellings. 
 Have learners read a short story and write a continuation of 
the story. 
E.g. Cinderella wore the shoes and she was taken away to 
marry the prince.  
 Let their story begin from this end. Use a variety of local 
stories. 
 Each effort is followed by editing focused on spelling. 
 Learners write their stories in groups and as individuals. Guide 
learners to create additional groups to correct spellings of 
words.  
Personal Development 
 
Creativity and Originality 
 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Spelling 
 
Strand 6: Extensive Reading 
Sub-Strand 1: Building the Love and Culture of Reading 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND 
CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.6.1.1: Read 
widely for 
pleasure, and 
to demonstrate 
independent 
reading and 
learning in the 
literary/content 
areas 
B6.6.1.1.1. Read and critique a variety of age-  and level appropriate books and 
present a one-page critical commentary based on a set of criteria, on each book 
read 
 Lead discussion on the importance of reading widely. 
 Have learners read books of their choice independently during the library period. 
 Learners think-pair-share their stories with peers. 
 Ask each learner to write a-two-paragraph summary of the book read. 
 Invite individuals to present their work to the class for feedback. 
 Encourage them to visit the local library to read and borrow books. 
 Encourage them to share whatever they read with their mates. 
Personal Development 
and Leadership 

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
222 
ENGLISH LANGUAGE SUBJECT PANEL MEMBERS AND REVIEWERS   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SN NAME ADDRESS/INSTITUTION 
1 Dr. Rev. Philip Gborsong (Lead) Department of English, UCC 
2 Genevieve Mensah NaCCA 
3.  Collins Amoako Classroom Practitioner 
4 AmaNarko Marfo Early childhood Dep’t, UCC 
5 Freda Quao  Accra College of Education 
6 Joana Vanderpuije NaCCA 
7 Faustina Cobson Classroom Practitioner 
8 Comfort Dorvlo Accra College of Education 
9 Thomas Ntumy Retired, Accra College of Education 
10 Alfred Quaittoo Kaneshie Snr.High School 
REVIEWERS 
12 Mr. Simon Tsadidey Retired Educationist 
13 Daniel Hammond Centre for Reading And Research, Ghana 
CURRICULUM ADVISOR 
14 Dr. Sam Awuku OPM (Oxford Policy Management) 
SUPERVISORS 
15 
Felicia Boakye-Yiadom (Mrs) NaCCA, Outgoing Acting Executive Secretary   
16 
Dr. Prince H. Armah NaCCA, Incoming Acting Executive Secretary   

 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
223 
 