

 
 
 
  
 
MINISTRY OF EDUCATION 
 
 
REPUBLIC OF GHANA 
SCIENCE  
CURRICULUM FOR PRIMARY SCHOOLS 
(BASIC 4 - 6) 
SEPTEMBER 2019 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019  ii 
Science Curriculum for Primary Schools 
 
 
 
 
Enquiries and comments on this Curriculum should be addressed to: 
The Executive Secretary 
National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NaCCA) 
Ministry of Education 
P. O. Box CT PM 77 
Cantonments 
Accra 
Telephone: 0302909071, 0302909862 
Email:        info@nacca.gov.gh  
Website:   www.nacca.gov.gh  
 
 
 

 
i 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
FOREWORD 
The new curriculum for Ghana’s primary schools is standards-based, which is our demonstration of placing learning at the heart of every classroom and 
ensuring  that  every  learner  receives  quality  education. Provision  of  accessible  quality  education  for  all  is  non-negotiable  if  we  are  to  meet  the  human 
capital needs of our country, required for accelerated sustainable national development. It is for this reason that the new curriculum sets out clearly the 
learning areas that need to be taught, how they should be taught and how they should be assessed. It provides a set of core competencies and standards 
that learners are to know, understand and demonstrate as they progress through the curriculum from one content standard to the other and from one 
phase to the next. The curriculum and its related teachers’ manual promote the use of inclusive and gender responsive pedagogy within the context of 
learning-centred teaching methods so that every learner can participate in every learning process and enjoy learning. The curriculum encourages the use 
of Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) for teaching and learning – ICTs as teaching and learning materials. 
 
The new curriculum has at its heart the acquisition of skills in the 4Rs of Reading, wRiting, aRithmetic and cReativity by all learners. It is expected that at 
any point of exit from a formal education, all learners should be equipped with these foundational skills for life, which are also prerequisites for Ghana 
becoming  a  learning  nation.  The  graduates  from the  school  system  should  become  functional  citizens  in  the  4Rs  and  lifelong  learners.  They  should  be 
digital literates, critical thinkers and problem solvers. The education they receive through the study of the learning areas in the curriculum should enable 
them to collaborate and communicate well with others and be innovative. The graduates from Ghana’s schools should be leaders with a high sense of 
national and global identity. The curriculum therefore provides a good opportunity in its design to develop individuals with the right skills and attitudes to 
lead the transformation of Ghana into an industrialised learning nation.  
 
For this reason, the Ministry of Education expects that learners, as a result of the new knowledge, skills and values they have acquired through the new 
curriculum, will show a new sense of identity as creative, honest and responsible citizens. These are our core values that underpin the identification and 
selection of the learning areas for this curriculum.  These core values serve as fundamental building blocks for developing into our learners the spirit of 
teamwork,  respect,  resilience  and  the  commitment  to  achieving  excellence.   The  Ministry  endorses  a  quality  learning  experience  as  an  entitlement  for 
each of Ghana’s school-going  girl  and  boy;  the  curriculum  has  rightly  focused  on  learning  and  learning  progression.  The  Ministry  has  also  endorsed 
accountability as a critical domain for effective workings of standards-based curriculum. 
 
More importantly the role of the teacher is to make this curriculum work for the intended purpose - to inculcate in learners the core competencies and 
values and to make learning happen; improve learning outcomes – and the support that teachers need is duly recognised and endorsed by my Ministry. 
The Ministry will support the implementation of the curriculum to include capacity development of all teachers in the new curriculum. Teachers matter in 
the  development  and  delivery  of  the  standards-based  curriculum  and  we  will  continue  to  support  our  teachers  on  this  journey  that  we  have  started 
together to put learning at the centre of what we do best; teach! 
 
I thank all those who have contributed their time and expertise to the development of this curriculum for primary schools in Ghana. 
 
 
Dr. Matthew Opoku Prempeh (MP) 
The Honourable Minister of Education 
 

 
ii 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
FOREWORD...................................................................................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
PHILOSOPHY .................................................................................................................................................... Error! Bookmark not defined. 
GENERAL AIMS ................................................................................................................................................ Error! Bookmark not defined. 
CORE COMPETENCIES ................................................................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
ORGANISATION OF THE CURRICULUM ........................................................................................................................................................ xvii 
SCOPE AND SEQUENCE .............................................................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined. 
BASIC 4 .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................. 2 
STRAND 2: CYCLES ...................................................................................................................................................................................................... 5 
STRAND 3: SYSTEMS .................................................................................................................................................................................................... 8 
STRAND 4: FORCES AND ENERGY .................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
STRAND 5: HUMANS AND THE ENVIRONMENT ......................................................................................................................................... 13 
BASIC 5 ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 17 
STRAND 1: DIVERSTY OF MATTER ..................................................................................................................................................................... 17 
STRAND 2: CYCLES ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 20 
STRAND 3: SYSTEMS ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 23 
STRAND 4: FORCES AND ENERGY .................................................................................................................................................................... 25 
STRAND 5: HUMANS AND THE ENVIRONMENT ......................................................................................................................................... 29 
BASIC 6 ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................... 34 

 
iii 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 1: DIVERSITY OF MATTER.................................................................................................................................................................... 34 
STRAND 2: CYCLES ................................................................................................................................................................................................... 36 
STRAND 3: SYSTEMS ................................................................................................................................................................................................. 38 
STRAND 4: FORCES AND ENERGY .................................................................................................................................................................... 40 
STRAND 5: HUMANS AND THE ENVIRONMENT ......................................................................................................................................... 44 
 
 
 
  

 
iv 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
RATIONALE FOR PRIMARY SCIENCE 
Science  forms  an  integral  part  of  our  everyday  life  and  it  is  a  universal  truth  that  development  is  hinged  on  science.    Science  and  Technology  is  the 
backbone of social, economic, political, and physical development of a country. It is a never-ending creative process, which serves to promote discovery 
and understanding. It consists of a body of knowledge which attempts to explain and interpret phenomena and experiences.  Science has changed  our 
lives and it is vital to Ghana’s future development.  
To  provide  quality  science  education,  teachers  must  facilitate  learning  in  the  science  classroom.  This  will  provide  the  foundations  for  discovering  and 
understanding  the  world  around  us  and  lay  the  grounds  for  science  and  science  related  studies  at  higher  levels  of  education.    Learners  should  be 
encouraged to understand how science can be used to explain what is occurring, predict how things will behave and analyse causes and origin of things in 
our environment. The science curriculum has considered the desired outcomes of education for learners at the basic level. Science is also concerned with 
the  development  of  attitudes  and  therefore  it  is  important  for  all  citizens  to  be  scientifically and  technologically  literate  for  sustainable  development. 
Science therefore ought to be taught using hands-on and minds-on approaches which learners will find as fun and adopt science as a culture. 
PHILOSOPHY 
Teaching Philosophy 
Ghana  believes  that  an  effective  science  education  needed  for  sustainable  development  should  be  inquiry-based.  Thus  science  education  must  provide 
learners  with  opportunities  to  expand,  change,  enhance  and  modify  the  ways  in  which  they  view  the  world.  It  should  be  pivoted on  learner-centred 
science teaching and learning approaches that engage learners physically and cognitively in the knowledge-acquiring process in a rich and rigorous inquiry-
driven environment.   
Learning Philosophy 
Science Learning is an active contextualized process of constructing knowledge based on learners’ experiences rather than acquiring it.  Learners are 
information constructors who operate as researchers.  Teachers serve as facilitators by providing the enabling environment that promotes the 
construction of learners’ own knowledge based on their previous experiences. This makes learning more relevant to the learner and leads to the 
development of critical thinkers and problem solvers.  
GENERAL AIMS 
The curriculum is aimed at developing individuals to become scientifically literate, good problem solvers, have the ability to think creatively and have both 
the confidence and competence to participate fully in Ghanaian society as responsible local and global citizens. 
SUBJECT AIMS 
The science curriculum is designed to help learners to: 
1. Develop the spirit of curiosity, creativity, innovation and critical thinking for investigating and understanding their environment. 

 
v 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
2. Develop skills, habits of mind and attitudes necessary for scientific inquiry. 
3. Communicate scientific ideas effectively. 
4. Use scientific concepts in explaining their own lives and the world around them. 
5. Live a healthy and quality life. 
6. Develop humane and responsible attitude towards the use of all resources of Ghana and elsewhere. 
7. Show concern and understanding of the interdependence of all living things and the Earth on which they live. 
8. Design activities for exploring and applying scientific ideas and concepts. 
9. Develop skills for using technology to enhance learning. 
10. Use materials in their environment in a sustainable manner. 
 
INSTRUCTIONAL EXPECTATIONS 
1. Guide and facilitate learning by generating discourse among learners and challenging them to accept and share responsibility for their own 
learning based on their unique individual differences.  
2. Select science content, adapt and plan lessons to meet the interests, knowledge, understanding, abilities, and experiences of learners. 
3. Work together as colleagues within and across disciplines and grade levels to develop communities of science learners who exhibit the skills of 
scientific inquiry and the attitudes and social values conducive to science learning. 
4. Use multiple methods and systematically gather data about learners’ understanding and ability, to guide science teaching and learning with 
arrangements to provide feedback to both learners and parents. 
5. Design and manage learning environments that provide students with the time, space, and resources needed for learning science. 
 
CORE COMPETENCIES 
The core competences describe a body of skills that teachers at all levels should seek to develop in their learners. They are ways in which teachers and 
learners  engage  with  the  subject  matter  as they  learn  the  subject.  The  competences  presented  here  describe  a  connected  body  of  core  skills  that are 
acquired throughout the processes of teaching and learning. 
Critical Thinking and Problem Solving (CP) 

 
vi 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
This skill develops learners’ cognitive and reasoning abilities to enable them analyse and solve problems. Critical thinking and problem solving skill enables 
learners to draw on their own experiences to analyse situations and choose the most appropriate out of a number of possible solutions. It requires that 
learners embrace the problem at hand, persevere and take responsibility for their own learning. 
 
Creativity and Innovation (CI) 
Creativity  and  Innovation promotes the development of entrepreneurial skills in learners’ through their ability to think of new ways of solving 
problems and developing technologies for addressing the problem at hand. It requires ingenuity of ideas,  arts, technology and enterprise. Learners 
having this skill are also able to think independently and creatively. 
 
Communication and Collaboration (CC) 
This  competence  promotes  in  learners  the  skills to make  use  of  languages,  symbols  and texts to exchange  information  about  themselves  and  their  life 
experiences.  Learners  actively  participate  in  sharing  their  ideas.  They  engage  in  dialogue  with  others  by  listening  to  and  learning  from  them.  They  also 
respect and value the views of others.  
Cultural Identity and Global Citizenship (CG) 
This competence involves developing learners to put country and service foremost through an understanding of what it means to be active citizens. This 
is done by inculcating in learners a strong sense of social and economic awareness. Learners make use of the knowledge, skills, competences and attitudes 
acquired  to  contribute  effectively  towards  the  socioeconomic  development  of  the  country  and  on  the  global  stage.  Learners  build  skills  to  critically 
identify and analyse cultural and global trends that enable them to contribute to the global community. 
Personal Development and Leadership (PL) 
This  competence  involves  improving  self-awareness  and  building  self-esteem.  It  also  entails  identifying  and developing  talents,  fulfilling  dreams  and 
aspirations. Learners are able to learn from mistakes and failures of the past. They acquire skills to develop other people to meet their needs. It involves 
recognising  the  importance of  values  such  as  honesty  and empathy  and  seeking  the  well-being  of  others.  Personal  development  and  leadership  enables 
learners to distinguish between right and wrong. The skill helps them to foster perseverance, resilience and self-confidence. PL helps them acquire the 
skill of leadership, self-regulation and responsibility necessary for lifelong learning. 
Digital Literacy (DL) 
Digital Literacy develops learners to discover, acquire knowledge, and communicate through ICT to support their learning. It also makes them use digital 
media responsibly. 
 
LEARNING DOMAINS (EXPECTED LEARNING BEHAVIOURS) 
A central aspect of this curriculum is the concept of three integral learning domains that should be the basis for instruction and assessment. These are 

 
vii 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
- Knowledge, Understanding and Application 
- Process Skills 
- Attitudes and Values 
 
KNOWLEDGE, UNDERSTANDING AND APPLICATION  
Under  this  domain,  learners  acquire  knowledge  through  some  learning  experiences.  They  may  also  show  understanding  of  concepts by  comparing, 
summarising, re-writing etc. in their own words and constructing meaning from instruction. The learner may also apply the knowledge acquired in some 
new contexts. At a higher level of learning behaviour, the learner may be required to analyse an issue or a problem. At a much more higher level, the 
learner may be required to synthesize knowledge by integrating a number of ideas to formulate a plan, solve a problem, compose a story, or a piece of 
music.  Further,  the  learners  may  be  required  to  evaluate,  estimate  and  interpret  a  concept.  At  the  last  level,  which  is  the  highest,  learners  may  be 
required to create, invent, compose, design and construct. These learning behaviours “knowing ”, “understanding”, “applying”, “analysing”, “synthesising”, 
“evaluating” and “creating” fall under the domain “Knowledge, Understanding and Application”.  
In this curriculum, learning indicators are stated with action verbs to show what the learner should know and be able to do.  For example, the learner 
will be able to describe something. Being able to “describe” something after teaching and learning has been completed means that the learner has 
acquired “knowledge”.  Being able to explain, summarise, and give examples etc. means that the learner has understood the concept taught. 
Similarly, being able to develop, defend, etc. means that the learner can “apply” the knowledge acquired in some new context.  You will note that each of 
the indicators in the curriculum contains an “action verb” that describes the behaviour the learner will be able to demonstrate after teaching and learning 
has taken place.  “Knowledge, Understanding and Application” is a domain that should be the prime focus of teaching and learning in schools.  Teaching in 
most cases tends to stress on knowledge acquisition to the detriment of other higher level behaviours such as applying knowledge.   
Each action verb in any indicator outlines the underlying expected outcome. Each indicator must be read carefully to know the learning domain towards 
which  you  have  to  teach.  The  focus  is  to  move teaching and learning from the didactic acquisition of “knowledge” where there is fact memorisation, 
heavy reliance on formulae, remembering facts without critiquing them or relating them to real world – surface learning – to a new position called – 
deep learning. Learners are expected to deepen their learning by knowledge application to develop critical thinking skills and to generate creative ideas 
to solve real life problems in their school lives and later in their adult lives. This is the position where learning becomes beneficial to the learner.   
 
The explanation and the key words involved in the “Knowledge, Understanding and Application” domain are as follows: 
 
Knowing: The ability to remember, recall, identify, define, describe, list, name, match, state principles, facts and concepts. Knowledge is the 
ability to remember or Recall concepts already learnt and this constitutes the lowest level of learning. 
Understanding: The ability to explain, summarise, translate, rewrite, paraphrase, give examples, generalise, estimate or predict 
consequences based upon a trend. Understanding is generally the ability to grasp the meaning of some concepts that may be 
verbal, pictorial, or symbolic. 

 
viii 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
Applying: This dimension is also referred to as “Use of Knowledge”.  Ability  to  use  knowledge  or  apply  knowledge,  apply  rules,  methods, 
principles, theories, etc. to situations that are new and unfamiliar. It also involves the ability to produce, solve, plan, demonstrate, 
discover etc.  
Analysing: The ability to break down concept/information into its component parts; to differentiate, compare, distinguish, outline, separate, 
identify  significant  points  etc.,  ability  to  recognise  unstated  assumptions  and  logical  fallacies;  ability  to  recognise  inferences  from 
facts etc.  
 Synthesising: The ability to put parts or ideas together to form a new whole.  It involves the ability to combine, compile, compose, devise, 
plan, revise, organise, create, generate new ideas and solutions. 
Evaluating: The ability to appraise, compare features of different things and make comments or judgment, contrast, criticise, justify, support, 
discuss, conclude, make recommendations etc.  Evaluation refers to the ability to judge the worth or value of some concepts 
based on some criteria. 
Creating:  The ability to use information or materials to plan, compose, produce, manufacture or construct other products. 
From the foregoing, creating is the highest form of thinking and learning and is therefore a very important behaviour.  This unfortunately, is the 
area where most learners perform poorly.  In order to get learners to develop critical thinking, skills beginning right from the lower primary 
level, it is advised that you do your best to help your learners to develop analytic skills as we have said already. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SKILLS AND PROCESSES 
These are specific activities or tasks that indicate performance or proficiency in the learning of science. They are useful benchmarks for planning lessons, 
developing exemplars and are the core of inquiry-based learning. 
Equipment and apparatus handling  
This is the skill of knowing the functions and limitations of various apparatus, and developing the ability to select and handle them appropriately for 
various tasks. 

 
ix 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
Observing 
This is the skill of using the senses to gather information about objects or events. This also includes the use of instruments to extend the range of our 
senses. 
Classifying 
This is the skill of grouping objects or events based on common characteristics. 
Comparing 
This is the skill of identifying the similarities and differences between two or more objects, concepts or processes. 
Communicating/Reporting 
This is the skill of transmitting, receiving and presenting information in concise, clear and accurate forms - verbal, written, pictorial, tabular or graphical. 
Predicting 
This is the skill of assessing the likelihood of an outcome based on prior knowledge of how things usually turn out. 
Analysing 
This is the skill of identifying the parts of objects, information or processes, and the patterns and relationships between these parts. 
Generating possibilities 
This is the skill of exploring all the options, possibilities and alternatives beyond the obvious or preferred one. 
Evaluating 
This is the skill of assessing the reasonableness, accuracy and quality of information, processes or ideas. This is also the skill of assessing the quality and 
feasibility of objects. 
Designing  
This is the skill of Visualizing and drawing new objects or gargets from imagination. 
Measuring 
This is the skill of using measuring instruments and equipment for measuring, reading and making observations. 
Interpreting  

 
x 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
This is the skill of evaluating data in terms of its worth: good, bad, reliable, unreliable; making inferences and predictions from written or graphical data; 
extrapolating and deriving conclusions.  Interpretation is also referred to as “Information Handling”. 
 
Recording 
This is the skill of drawing or making graphical representation boldly and clearly, well labelled and pertinent to the issue at hand. 
Generalising 
This is the skill of being able to use the conclusions arrived at in an experiment to what could happen in similar situations. 
Designing of Experiments 
This is the skill of developing hypotheses; planning and designing of experiments; persistence in the execution of experimental activities; modification of 
experimental activities where necessary in order to reach conclusions. 
 
ATTITUDES AND VALUES 
To be effective, competent and reflective citizens, who will be willing and capable of solving personal and societal problems, learners should be exposed 
to  situations  that  challenge  them  to  raise  questions  and  attempt  to  solve  problems. Learners,  therefore  need  to  acquire  positive  attitudes,  values  and 
psychosocial skills that will enable them participate in debates and take a stand on issues affecting them and others.  
 
  Attitudes 
i. Curiosity: 
The inclination or feeling toward seeking information about how things work in a variety of fields. 
ii. Perseverance: 
The ability to pursue a problem until a satisfying solution is found. 
iii. Flexibility in ideas: 
Willingness to change opinion in the face of more plausible evidence. 
iv. Respect for Evidence: 
Willingness to collect and use data in one’s investigation, and also have respect for data collected by others. 
v. Reflection: 
The habit of critically reviewing ways in which an investigation has been carried out to see possible faults and other ways by which the investigation 
could be improved upon.  

 
xi 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
The teacher should endeavour to ensure that learners cultivate the above scientific attitudes and process skills as a prelude to effective work in 
science. 
 
Values 
At  the  heart of  this  curriculum  is  the  belief  in  nurturing  honest,  creative  and  responsible  citizens.  As  such,  every  part  of this  curriculum,  including  the 
related pedagogy, should be consistent with the following set of values. 
 
Respect: This includes respect for the nation of Ghana, its institutions and laws and the culture and respect among its citizens and friends of Ghana. 
 
Diversity: Ghana is a multicultural society in which every citizen enjoys fundamental rights and responsibilities. Learners must be taught to respect 
the views of all persons and to see national diversity as a powerful force for nation development. The curriculum promotes social cohesion.  
 
Equity: The socio-economic  development across the country is uneven. Consequently, it is necessary to ensure an equitable distribution of resources 
based on the unique needs of learners and schools. Ghana’s learners are from diverse backgrounds which require the provision of equal opportunities to 
all, and that, all strive to care for each other.  
 
Commitment to achieving excellence: Learners must be taught to appreciate the opportunities provided through the curriculum and persist in doing 
their best in whatever field of endeavour as global citizens. The curriculum encourages innovativeness through creative and critical thinking and the use of 
contemporary technology.  
 
Teamwork/Collaboration: Learners  are  encouraged  to  be  become  committed  to  team-oriented  working  and  learning  environments. This  also  means 
that learners should have an attitude of tolerance to be able to live peacefully with all persons. 
 
Truth and Integrity: The curriculum aims to develop learners into individuals who will consistently  tell the truth irrespective of the consequences. In 
addition, be morally upright with the attitude of doing the right thing even when no one is watching. Also, be true to themselves and be willing to live the 
values of honesty and compassion. Equally important, is the practice of positive values as part of the ethos or culture of the work place, which includes 
integrity and perseverance. These underpin the learning processes to allow learners to apply skills and competences in the world of work. 
 
The action verbs provided in the learning domains in each content standard should help you to structure your teaching to achieve the desired learning 
outcomes.  Select from the action verbs provided for your teaching, for evaluation exercises and for test construction.  Check the learning indicators to 
ensure that you have given the required emphasis to each of the learning domains in your teaching and assessment. 
 
 

 
xii 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
ASSESSMENT 
Assessment is a process of collecting and evaluating information about learners and using the information to make decisions to improve their learning. 
 
In this curriculum, it is suggested that assessment is used to promote learning. Its purpose is to identify the strengths and weaknesses of learners to 
enable teachers ascertain their learner’s response to instruction.  
 
Assessment is both formative and summative. Formative assessment is viewed in terms of Assessment as learning and Assessment for learning.  
Assessment as learning: Assessment as learning relates to engaging learners to reflect on the expectations of their learning. Information that learners 
provide the teacher forms the basis for refining teaching-learning strategies. Learners are assisted to play their roles and to take responsibility of their 
own learning to improve performance.  Learners are assisted to set their own goals and monitor their progress.  
 
Assessment for learning:  It is an approach used to monitor learner’s progress and achievement. This occurs throughout the learning process. The 
teacher employs assessment for learning to seek and interpret evidence which serves as timely feedback to refine their teaching strategies and improve 
learners’ performance. Learners become actively involved in the learning process and gain confidence in what they are expected to learn.   
 
Assessment of learning: This is summative assessment.  It describes the level learners have attained in the learning, what they know and can do over a 
period of time. The emphasis is to evaluate the learner’s cumulative progress and achievement.  
 
It must be emphasised that all forms of assessment should be based on the domains of learning. In developing assessment procedures, try to select 
indicators in such a way that you will be able to assess a representative sample from a given strand. Each indicator in the curriculum is considered a 
criterion to be achieved by the learners.  When you develop assessment items or questions that are based on a representative sample of the indicators 
taught, the assessment is referred to as a “Criterion-Referenced Assessment”.  In many cases, a teacher cannot assess all the indicators taught in a term 
or year.  The assessment procedure you use i.e. class assessments, homework, projects etc. must be developed in such a way that the various procedures 
complement one another to provide a representative sample of indicators taught over a period. 
 
SUGGESTED TIME ALLOCATION 
A total of four periods a week, each period consisting of thirty minutes, is allocated to the teaching of Science at the Upper Primary level.  It is 
recommended that the teaching periods be divided as follows:  
Theory:  2 periods per week (two periods of 30 minutes each) 
Practical: 2 periods per week (one double-period) 
 

 
xiii 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
PEDAGOGICAL APPROACHES 
These  include  the  approaches,  methods  and  strategies  for  ensuring  that  every  learner  benefits  from  appropriate  and  relevant  teaching  and  learning 
episodes which are timely assessed and feedback provided to the learner and other stakeholders such as parents and education authorities. It includes the 
type and use of appropriate and relevant teaching and learning resources to ensure that all learners attain the expected level of learning outcomes. The 
curriculum emphasises:  
 The  creation  of  learning-centred  classrooms  through  the  use  of  creative  approaches  to  teaching  and  learning  as  strategies  to  ensuring 
learner empowerment and independent learning.  
 the positioning of inclusion and equity at the centre of quality teaching and learning.  
 the use of differentiation and scaffolding as teaching and learning strategies for ensuring that no learner is left behind 
 the use of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) as a pedagogical tool. 
 the identification of subject specific instructional expectations needed for making learning in the subject relevant to learners 
 the  integration  of  assessment  for  learning,  as  learning  and  of  learning  into  the  teaching  and  learning  process  and  as  an  accountability 
strategy 
 use questioning techniques that promote deeper learning  
L E ARNI NG-CE NTRE D PEDAGOG Y 
The learner is at the centre of learning. At the heart of the curriculum is an emphasis on learning progression and improvement of learning outcomes for 
Ghana’s young people with a focus on the 4Rs – Reading, wRiting, aRithmetic and cReativity. It is expected that at each curriculum phase, learners would 
be offered the essential learning experiences to progress seamlessly to the next phase. Where there are indications that a learner is not sufficiently ready 
for the next phase a compensatory provision through differentiation should be provided to ensure that such a learner is ready to progress with his/her 
cohort. At the primary school, the progression phases are: pre-primary (KG1 – 2), primary phases (B1 – B3 and B4 to B6). 
 
The curriculum encourages the creation of a learning-centred classroom with the opportunity for learners to engage in meaningful “hands-on” activities 
that bring home to the learner what they are learning in school and what they know from outside of school. The learning centred classroom is a place for 
the  learners  to  discuss  ideas  and  through  the  inspiration  of the  teacher  actively  engage  in  looking  for  answers  through  working  in  groups  to  solve 
problems. This also includes researching for information and analysing and evaluating the information obtained. The aim of the learning-centred classroom 
approach  is  to  develop  learner  autonomy  so  that  learners  can  take  ownership  of  their  learning.  It  provides  the  opportunity  for  deep  and  profound 
learning to take place.  
The teacher should create a learning atmosphere that ensures:  
 Learners feel safe and accepted. 
 Learners are given frequent opportunities to interact with varied sources of information, teaching and learning materials and ideas in a variety of 
ways. 
 The teacher assumes the position of a facilitator or coach who: Helps learners to identify a problem suitable for investigation via project work. 
 Problems are connected to the context of the learners’ world so that it presents authentic opportunities for learning. 

 
xiv 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 Subject matter around the problem, not the discipline. 
 Learners responsibly define their learning experience and draw up a plan to solve the problem in question. 
 Learners collaborate whilst learning. 
 Demonstrate the results of their learning through a product or performance. 
It is more productive for learners to find answers to their own questions rather than for teachers to provide the answers and their opinions in a learning-
centred classroom.  
 
 
I NCL USI O N 
Inclusion entails access and learning for all learners, especially, those disadvantaged. All learners are entitled to a broad and balanced curriculum in every 
school in Ghana. The daily learning activities to which learners are exposed should ensure that the learners’ right to equal access to quality education is 
being met.  The curriculum suggests a variety of approaches that address learners’ diversity  and  their  special  needs  in  the  learning  process.  These 
approaches when used in lessons, will contribute to the full development of the learning potential of every learner. Learners have individual needs and 
different  learning  styles,  learning  experiences  and  different  levels  of  motivation  for  learning.  Planning,  delivery  and  reflection on  daily  learning  episodes 
should take these differences into consideration. The curriculum therefore promotes:  
 learning that is linked to the learner’s background and to their prior experiences, interests, potential and capacities;  
 learning that is meaningful because it aligns with learners’ ability (e.g. learning that is oriented towards developing general capabilities and solving 
the practical problems of everyday life); and 
 The active involvement of the learners in the selection and organisation of learning experiences, making them aware of their importance in the 
process and also enabling them to assess their own learning outcomes. 
 
 
DIFFERENTIATION AND SCAFFOLDING 
This curriculum is to be delivered through the use of creative approaches. Differentiation and Scaffolding are pedagogical approaches to be used within 
the context of the creative approaches.  
Differentiation is a process by which differences between learners (learning styles, interest and readiness to learn etc.) are accommodated so that all 
students  in  a  group  have  best  chance  of  learning.    Differentiation  could  be  by  task,  support  and  outcome.    Differentiation,  as  a  way  of  ensuring  each 
learner benefits adequately from the delivery of the curriculum, can be achieved in the classroom through:  
 Task 
 One-on-one support  
 Outcome  
Differentiation by task involves teachers setting different tasks for learners of different ability e.g. in sketching the plan and shape of their classroom 
some leaners could be made to sketch with free hand while others would be made to trace the outline of the plan of the classroom. 

 
xv 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
Differentiation by support involves the teacher providing a targeted support to learners who are seen as performing below expected standards or at 
risk  of  not  reaching  the  expected  level  of  learning  outcome.  This  support  may  include  a  referral  to  a  Guidance  and  Counselling  Officer  for  academic 
support. 
Differentiation by outcome involves the teacher allowing learners to respond at different levels. In this case, identified learners are allowed more time 
to complete a given task. 
Scaffolding in education refers to the use of a variety of instructional techniques aimed at moving learners progressively towards stronger understanding 
and ultimately greater independence in the learning process.  
It involves breaking up the learning episodes, experiences or concepts into smaller parts and then providing learners with the support they need to learn 
each part.  The process may require a teacher assigning an excerpt of a longer text to learners to read, engage them to discuss the excerpt to improve 
comprehension of its rationale, then guiding them through the key words/vocabulary to ensure learners have developed a thorough understanding of the 
text before engaging them to read the full text.  Common scaffolding strategies available to the teacher include:  
 giving learners a simplified version of a lesson, assignment, or reading, and then gradually increasing the complexity,  difficulty, or sophistication 
over time. 
 describing or illustrating a concept, problem, or process in multiple ways to ensure understanding. 
 giving learners an exemplar or model of an assignment, they will be asked to complete. 
 giving learners a vocabulary lesson before they read a difficult text. 
 clearly describing the purpose of a learning activity, the directions learners need to follow, and the learning goals they are expected to achieve. 
 explicitly describing how the new lesson builds on the knowledge and skills learners were taught in a previous lesson.  
 
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY 
ICT has been integrated into this curriculum as a teaching and learning tool to enhance deep and independent learning.  Some of the expected outcomes 
that this curriculum aims to achieve through ICT use for teaching and learning are: 
 improved teaching and learning processes.  
 improved consistency and quality of teaching and learning.  
 increased opportunities for more learner-centred pedagogical approaches.  

 
xvi 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 improved inclusive education practices by addressing inequalities in gender, language, ability.  
 improved collaboration, creativity, higher order thinking skills.  
 enhanced flexibility and differentiated approach of delivery.  
 
The use of ICT as a teaching and learning tool is to provide learners access to large quantities of information online. It also provides the framework for 
analysing data to investigate patterns and relationships in a geographical context. Once pupils have made their findings, ICT can then help them organize, 
edit and present information in many different ways. 
Learners  need  to  be  exposed  to  the  various  ICT  tools  around  them  including  calculators,  radios,  cameras,  phones,  television  sets  and  computer  and 
related software like Microsoft Office packages – Word, PowerPoints and Excel as teaching and learning tools. The exposure that learners are given at 
the Primary School level to use ICT in exploring learning will build their confidence and will increase their level of motivation to apply ICT use in later 
years, both within and outside of education. ICT use for teaching and learning is expected to enhance the quality and learners’ level of competence in the 
4R 

 
xvii 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
ORGANISATION OF THE CURRICULUM 
 
The curriculum has been structured into four columns which are Strands, Sub-strands, Content standards, Indicators and exemplars. A unique annotation 
is used for numbering the learning indicators in the curriculum for the purpose of easy referencing. The annotation is indicated in table 2. 
 
Example: B4 .2.4.1.2 
ANNOTATION MEANING / REPRESENTATION 
         B4 Year Or Class 
         2 Strand Number 
         4 Sub-Strand Number 
         1 Content Standard Number 
         2  Indicator Number 
   
 
Strands are the broad areas/sections of the science content to be studied. 
Sub-strands are the topics within each strand under which the content is organised.   
Content standard refers to the pre-determined level of knowledge, skill and/or attitude that a learner attains by a set stage of education. 
Indicator is a clear outcome or milestone that learners have to exhibit in each year to meet the content standard expectation. The indicators represent 
the minimum expected standard in a year. 
Exemplar: support and guidance which clearly explains the expected outcomes of an indicator and suggests what teaching and learning activities could 
take, to support the facilitators/teachers in the delivery of the curriculum. 

 
xviii 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 ILLUSTRATION 
 
 
Strand 1: DIVERSITY OF MATTER 
Sub-strand 1: Living and Non-Living Things 
B1 B2 B3 B4 
B1.1.1.1: Show understanding of the 
physical features and life processes of 
living things and use this 
understanding to classify them 
B2.1.1.1: Show understanding of 
the physical features and life 
processes of living things and use 
this understanding to classify 
them 
B3.1.1.1: Show understanding of 
the physical features and life 
processes of living things and 
use this understanding to 
classify them. 
B4.1.1.1: Show understanding 
of the physical features and 
life processes of living things 
and use this understanding to 
classify them 
B1.1.1.1.1: Observe and describe different 
kinds of things in the environment. 
B2.1.1.1.1: Describe the physical 
features of plants (roots, stem, leaves 
B3.1.1.1.1:  Group  living  things  into 
plants  and  animals  based on  their 
physical features  
B4.1.1.1.1: Group living things into 
plants  and  animals  based  on  their 
uses  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Class Content Standards Learning Indicators 
Class Content Standards Learning Indicators 

 
xix 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRUCTURE 
The science curriculum is structured to cover B4 to B6 under five strands with a number of sub-strands as shown in the table below:  
STRAND B4 B5 B6 
SUB-STRANDS 
DIVERSITY OF MATTER 
Living and Non-Living Things  
Materials   
Living and Non-Living Things   
Materials  
Living and Non-Living Things 
Materials 
CYCLES 
Earth Science  
Life Cycles of organisms  
Earth Science  
Life Cycles of organisms  
Earth Science  
Life Cycles of organisms  
SYSTEMS 
The Human Body Systems  
The Solar System  
Ecosystems  
The Human Body Systems  
The Solar system  
Ecosystems  
The Human Body Systems  
The Solar system  
Ecosystems  
FORCES AND ENERGY 
Sources and Forms of Energy  
Electricity and electronics  
Forces and Movement  
Sources and Forms of Energy  
Electricity and Electronics  
Forces and Movement  
Sources and Forms of Energy  
Electricity and Electronics  
Forces and Movement  
HUMANS AND THE 
ENVIRONMENT 
Personal Hygiene and Sanitation  
Diseases  
Climate Change  
Personal Hygiene and Sanitation  
Diseases  
Science and Industry  
Climate Change  
Personal Hygiene and Sanitation  
Diseases  
Science and Industry  
Climate Change  
 
 
 
 
 

 
xx 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SCOPE AND SEQUENCE 
 
STRAND SUB-STRANDS B1 B2 B3 B4 B5 B6 
DIVERSITY OF MATTER 
Living and Non-Living Things √ √ √ √ √ √ 
Materials √ √ √ √ √ √ 
CYCLES 
Earth Science √ √ √ √ √ √ 
Life Cycles of Organisms 
√  √ 
√ √ √ 
SYSTEMS 
The Human Body Systems √ √ √ √ √ √ 
The Solar system  √ √ √ √ √ 
Ecosystems √  √ √ √ √ 
FORCES AND ENERGY  
  
Sources and Forms of Energy  √ √ √ √ √ √ 
Electricity and Electronics √ √ √ √ √ √ 
Forces and Movement √ √ √ √ √ √ 
HUMANS AND THE 
ENVIRONMENT 
Personal Hygiene and Sanitation √ √ √ √ √ √ 
Diseases √ √ √ √ √ √ 
Science and Industry √ √ √ 
 
√ √ 
Climate Change √ √ √ √ √ √ 
 
 

 
1 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
BASIC 4 
STRAND 1: DIVERSITY OF MATTER  
SUB-STRAND 1: LIVING AND NON-LIVING THINGS 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.1.1 Understand 
the physical features 
and life processes of 
living things and use 
this understanding to 
classify them 
B4.1.1.1.1 Classify animals into insects, birds, mammals and reptiles  
 Learners embark on a walk to observe and record names of different kinds of animals in 
their community or show videos and pictures of different kinds of animals. 
 Learners talk about the different animals based on their limbs, body covering, height, shape, 
size, where they live, how they move, what they eat. etc. 
 Provide flashcards of many different animals to learners in groups.  
 Assist learners to sort the pictures into insects, birds, mammals and reptiles and produce 
animal classification cards or tables.  
 Learners display and do presentations on their group work. 
 Learners to give reasons for their classifications. 
 Ask Learners to identify things which are common to all the different kinds of animals. 
 Assist learners to mould different kinds of animals using suitable materials (such as blu tack, 
clay, cardboard etc.).  
 Learners draw different kinds of animals (insects, birds, mammals and reptiles). 
B4.1.1.1.2 Know life processes of animals (movement, nutrition and reproduction) 
 Learners observe videos and pictures depicting movement, nutrition and reproduction in 
animals. 
 Learners describe how various animals (insects, birds, reptiles and mammals) move, feed 
and reproduce. 
 Learners role-play or pantomime movement and nutrition of animals. 
 In groups, learners discuss the importance of movement, nutrition and reproduction to 
animals. 
 
NB: Teachers should collect and preserve some common animals for presentation. 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Critical Thinking and 
Problem-Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Creativity and Innovation 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Analysing 
Classifying 
Generalising 
 
 
 
 
 

 
3 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.1.2 Understand 
the differences 
between living things 
and things which have 
never been alive 
B4.1.1.2.2 Describe the physical appearance of different types of plants (trees, shrubs, 
climbing, creeping) 
 Take learners out to observe different types of plants. Pictures and videos can also be 
used. 
  Learners describe the physical features of different types of plants (in terms of their 
structure and size). 
Project: Learners create a plant album of different types of plants. (shrubs, trees, climbing and 
creeping plants). 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and 
Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Communicating 
Manipulating, Creating 
SUB-STRAND 1 
CONT’D 
 
B4.1.1.2 Understand 
the differences 
between living things 
and things which have 
never been alive 
B4.1.1.2.3 Describe the physical features of mammals, reptiles, insects and 
amphibians 
  Learners observe mammals, reptiles, insects and amphibians through videos and pictures 
(or relevant specimen such as frogs, lizards, cockroaches). 
 Learners are guided to use think pair-share to identify and discuss the animals they have 
observed. 
 Learners describe the physical features of the animals stated in terms of their limbs, body 
covering, height, shape, size, where they live, how they move and what they eat.  
 Learners, in a matching activity, use flashcards to match specific animals with their 
identified physical features.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Communication and 
Collaboration. 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Analysing 
Communicating 
Classifying 
 
 

 
4 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 2: MATERIALS 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.1.2.2 Understand 
mixtures, their types, 
formation, uses and 
ways of separating 
them into their 
components 
 
B4.1.2.2.1 Identify a liquid-liquid mixture and describe how to separate its 
components 
 Display different types of liquids for learners to observe, e. g. water, kerosene, cooking 
oil, milk, soft drinks, etc. 
 Task learners to identify the liquids provided. 
 In groups, learners mix liquids of the same kind, different kinds and then observe and 
record their findings, e.g., vinegar and water, palm oil and water, etc. 
 Engage learners in discussion to describe the different types of liquid-liquid mixtures. 
[Those which are able to mix uniformly (miscible liquids) and those which are not able to 
mix uniformly (immiscible)]. 
 
Project: Separation of a mixture of immiscible liquids. 
  Learners investigate to separate a mixture of immiscible liquids such as cooking oil and water. 
 
NB: This activity can be undertaken with the aid of a separating funnel or an improvised version 
of it. Do not bring liquids that are flammable or poisonous to class for this lesson. 
Core Competencies 
Critical Thinking and 
Problem-Solving 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration. 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Analysing 
Manipulating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
STRAND 2: CYCLES  
SUB-STRAND 1: EARTH SCIENCE 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.1.1 Recognise 
that some events in 
our environment occur 
recurrently   
B4.2.1.1.1 Demonstrate understanding of cyclic movements in the environment 
 Guide learners to build a pendulum (a ball hanging on a string) and let them observe 
the swinging motion. 
 Learners observe the following movements: 
(1) the second hands on an analogue clock 
(2) merry-go-round  
(3) a swinging pendulum,  
(4) movement of their limbs during walking. 
 Assist learners to come out with one thing that is common to all the movements. 
Project: Life Cycle of a Maize Plant 
              Learners investigate the life cycle of a maize plant and report on their findings.  
Core Competencies 
Critical Thinking and 
Problem-Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Generalizing 
Analysing, Communicating 
Reporting 
 
B4.2.1.2 Recognise the 
relationship between 
the earth and the sun 
B4.2.1.2.1 Identify the objects in the sky during day and night  
 Ask learners to step outside the classroom and: (a) name the objects in the daytime 
sky; (b) identify the objects in the night time sky; (c) identify the differences and 
similarities in day and night sky, (d). answer the question: what happens to the sky in 
a 24-hour cycle?  
 Learners draw Venn diagrams (2 circles then another circle overlapping the two) and 
put in them the things they see in the night sky, day sky and then in both skies and 
display their work on the classroom walls. 
 Learners write about the importance of the things they see in the skies. 
Core Competencies 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and 
Problem-Solving. 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Generalising 
B4.2.1.3 Show 
understanding of the 
roles of condensation, 
evaporation, 
transpiration and 
precipitation in the 
hydrological (water) 
cycle 
 
 
 
 
B4.2.1.3.1 Demonstrate the process of evapotranspiration  
 Guide learners are guided to breathe out or blow air onto a transparent surface, e.g. 
a glass or plastic bottle and share their observations. 
 Explain to learners that just as humans release water vapour when they respire, so 
do plants when they transpire. 
 Put learners into groups and give each group a young potted plant, plastic wrap bag 
and a rubber band to undertake the following activities: 
(1) Let learners examine the surface of the leaves of the plants and mop off any water 
droplets on the leaves. 
(2)  Tie the plastic wrap bag around the plant up to the stem and leave it for an hour.  
(3) Observe both plant and plastic wrap surfaces. 
(4)  Let learners report on what happens. 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Manipulating 
Analysing and 
Communicating 
 
 

 
6 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.1.5 Recognise 
water and air as 
important natural 
resources 
 
B4.2.1.5.1 Demonstrate ways of making water safe for use 
 Learners identify the sources of water in the community. 
 Learners discuss qualities of good drinking water. 
 Provide learners with samples of water from the following sources: rivers, wells, 
lagoons, boreholes, ponds and standpipe, etc. 
 Learners brainstorm on how to make water safe for use. 
 Learners, in groups, demonstrate the different ways of making water safe. For 
example, filtering, boiling, addition of iodine tablets, use of chlorine, use of water 
filters, addition of alum, etc.  
 Learners discuss the dangers of drinking unsafe water. 
Note: Teacher to supply materials for this activity. 
Precaution: Learners must not taste any of the water samples used in the lesson. 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Critical Thinking and 
Problem-Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Manipulating 
Analysing, Communicating 
 

 
7 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 2: LIFE CYCLES OF ORGANISMS 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B4.2.2.1 Demonstrate 
understanding of the 
life cycle of plants 
B4.2. 2.1.1. Observe, identify and give functions of the parts of a plant 
 Learners, in groups, uproot young plants from the school surroundings for 
a class activity. 
 Learners observe, identify and give functions of parts of the plants (roots, 
stem, leaves and flower).  
 Learners draw annotated diagrams of the plants and display them in class. 
 Learners relate the functions of the parts to their positions on the plant.  
 
 
B4.2.2.1.2. Examine some common seeds and how they germinate 
 Review learner’s knowledge that seeds can germinate with or without soil. 
 This activity will take some days. 
 
NB:  It is a repeat of the B3 activity but this time, the focus is on the process of 
 germination.  
 
 Learners will work with beans or maize seeds. 
Learners first observe the dry seed coat, then when it absorbs water to 
swell rapturing of seed coat, sprouting of the root, sprouting of the stem 
and seed leaves, the elongation of the root and stem. 
 Learners follow the process and write reports.  
NB: Report should include diagrams of each stage of germination. 
Core Competencies 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Classifying 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Generalising 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Manipulating, Observing, Analysing, 
Evaluating, Recording 
 

 
8 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 3: SYSTEMS 
 
SUB-STRAND 1: THE HUMAN BODY SYSTEMS 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.1.1 Recognise that 
different parts of the 
human body work 
interdependently to 
perform a specific 
function  
 
B4.3.1.1.1 Know the organs of the digestive system and their functions  
 Show videos, pictures and models of the digestive system.  
 Learners keenly observe the organs of the digestive system.  
 Explain to learners the functions of the various organs in the digestive system. 
 Draw a diagram of the digestive system and cut out the various parts of the system into 
flash cards. 
 Learners randomly pick the parts of the digestive system on flashcards. 
 Learners build the digestive system by arranging the parts in an orderly manner as they 
appear in the digestive system.    
 Engage learners in an activity to role-play the various parts of the digestive system and 
their functions, with the aid of flashcards.  
 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Generating 
Communicating 
 
 
 
SUB-STRAND 2: THE SOLAR SYSTEM 
B4.3.2.1 Show an 
understanding of the 
orderliness of the sun, 
planets and satellites in 
the solar system, as 
well as the important 
role of the sun in the 
existence of the solar 
system 
B4.3.2.1.1 Explain that the sun is at the centre of the solar system  
 
 Present learners with a chart, model or video showing the solar system.  
 Draw the solar system, using different colours to illustrate the different bodies. 
 Guide learners to role-play the stars, planets and satellites in the solar system (different 
learners assume and role-play the sun, the earth and other planets in the solar system). 
 Present the chart of the solar system and help learners identify the sun as being at the 
centre of the solar system.   
 Learners are guided to identify the benefits of the sun to the solar system.  
 
Project: Learners mould stars, planets and satellites in the solar system.  
 
Core Competencies 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Designing Experiment 
Planning 
Observing 
Recording 
Analysing 
 
 

 
9 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 3: ECOSYSTEM 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.3.3.1 Show 
understanding and 
appreciation of the 
interactions and 
interdependencies of 
organisms in an 
ecosystem 
B4.3.3.1.1 Explain the concept of ecosystem 
 Learners role-play a typical family setup, showing how everyone is 
interdependent. 
  Learners identify the role of each member of their family, e.g. father, 
mother, siblings. The key lesson is to understand that everybody in the 
group is important and depend on one another. 
 Teacher mentions a habitat and the learners mention which plants, animals, 
and other organisms live there (Use games). 
 Show pictures and videos of forest settings having trees, grass, a stream, soil, 
fishes, rodents, frogs, etc. to explain to learners what an ecosystem looks 
like. 
 Learners discuss the importance of every element/member of a given 
ecosystem, e.g. frogs, weeds, soil and fish in a pond.  
 Brainstorm with learners to come out with responses to what happens 
when a member of the system is removed. 
 Assist learners to realise that it causes imbalance in the ecosystem. Relate 
the concept to everyday life, e.g. the destruction of the forest through 
galamsey and the felling of trees bring about imbalances in the environment. 
 Learners cite examples of ecosystems in their community and suggest ways 
of preserving them.  
Core Competencies 
Cultural identity and Global 
Citizenship 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Predicting 
Analysing 
Generalising 
Communicating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
10 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 4: FORCES AND ENERGY 
SUB-STRAND 1: SOURCES AND FORMS OF ENERGY 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.1.1 Demonstrate 
understanding of the 
concept of energy, its 
various forms, sources 
and how to transform 
and conserve it 
 B4.4.1.1.1 Identify the effect of heat on the change of state of substances 
 Guide learners through simple activities to identify effects of heat on 
substances (use liquids and solids, e.g. water, shea butter, candles, etc.). 
 Learners demonstrate evaporation by boiling water and discuss their 
experiences. 
 
Note: let learners measure the quantity of the water before and after boiling 
to show the effect of heat on water. 
 
 Elaborate on learners’ ideas to explain how the escaping vapour can be 
changed into water (through the loss of heat). 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Recording 
Measuring 
Communicating 
 SUB-STRAND 2: ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS 
 
 
B4.4.2.1 Demonstrate 
knowledge of 
generation of 
electricity, its 
transmission and 
transformation into 
other forms  
B4.4.2.1.1 Identify the uses of electricity 
 Begin by asking learners what they use to iron their school uniforms.  
 Use simple activities to demonstrate uses of electricity, (e.g. providing light, 
powering TVs, mobile phones, cooking, heating water, etc.) 
 Learners draw things in the home and at school that use electricity. 
 
Project: Electricity Generation 
Learners, in groups, generate electricity from fruit cells (orange, lime, tomatoes, 
potatoes and apple) and fuel cells, e.g. water.  
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing 
Generalising 
Communicating 
Manipulating 
Recording 
 
 

 
11 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.2.1 Demonstrate 
knowledge of 
generation of 
electricity, its 
transmission and 
transformation into 
other forms 
B4.4.2.1.2 Describe ways of conserving electricity 
 Learners explain why their parents put off the lights, television and other 
electrical appliances when leaving the house in the morning.  
 Discuss with learners what happens when electrical gadgets such as heaters 
and pressing irons are left on when leaving the house. 
 Learners work in groups to discuss activities that contribute to wastage of 
electricity.  
 Based on their responses, facilitate a discussion on ways of conserving 
electricity. 
 Learners present their ideas to class for discussion. 
  
Project: Monitoring electricity consumption in the home and at school. 
 Learners record the amount of electricity consumed in their homes or at school 
over a period of three (3) months and report on their findings. 
Core Competencies 
Personal Development and 
leadership 
Cultural identity and Global 
Citizenship 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing; Analysing; Evaluating 
Generalising, Communicating 
Interpreting, Measuring 
Generalising, Recording 
B4.4.2.2 Know the 
functions and 
assemblage of basic 
electronics 
components 
 
 
 
B4.4.2.2.1 Identify the basic components of electronic circuits 
  Learners are put into groups and each group is provided with connecting 
wires, batteries (dry cells), switches and LEDs (of different colours).  
  Learners are assisted to identify the various components provided. 
  Learners observe a demonstration on how to connect the components to 
light the LED. 
  Learners are guided to connect the components to make the LED produce 
light. 
 Engage learners to discuss the use of each component 
 Learners draw the circuits they have connected. 
 Learners suggest other materials that can be used in the absence of the 
connecting wire. 
 Learners act as electrons flowing in a circuit through the classroom. Learners 
act out the role of various components (resistor, capacitor, etc) in the circuit.  
NB: Build a stock of electronic components from discarded electronic gadgets 
such as radio and TV sets. 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Generalising 
Communicating 
 
 
 
 

 
12 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
SUB-STRAND 3:  FORCES AND MOVEMENT 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.3.1 Know that 
movement is caused by 
applied forces due to 
the release of stored 
energy 
 
 
B4.4.3.1.1 Demonstrate understanding of elastic and compressional forces 
and their everyday applications 
 Learners bring catapults, rubber bands, springs and bicycle pumps to class. 
 Guide learners to demonstrate different effects of forces, e.g. by kicking a 
ball in different directions, pushing a table, crumpling a piece of paper or 
stopping a moving toy. 
 Engage learners in activities to demonstrate elastic and compression forces 
using the materials brought to class. 
  Learners to discuss how elastic and compressional forces are applied in 
everyday life. 
 
Core Competencies 
Cultural identity and Global 
Citizenship 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Predicting 
Analysing 
Generalising 
Communicating 
 

 
13 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 5: HUMANS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
SUB-STRAND 1:  PERSONAL HYGIENE AND SANITATION 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.1.1 Recognise the 
importance of personal 
hygiene 
B4. 5.1.1.1 Know how to care for one’s self and the environment 
 Learners brainstorm in groups and share ideas with the whole class on 
what they do to maintain personal hygiene.  
 Learners write their ideas on flashcards (ideas may include bathing twice 
daily, cleaning the teeth, cutting their finger nails, washing their towels, 
sweeping their classrooms, etc.). 
 Brainstorm with learners on what will happen if they do not take good care 
of their bodies. 
 Learners are assigned to investigate materials that can be used to enhance 
personal hygiene (to brush the teeth, clean the armpit or bath). 
 
 
 
B4. 5.1.1.2 Describe ways of sustaining the environment through waste 
management 
 Learners watch pictures and videos on how to sustain the environment, 
including separating waste. 
 Engage learners in groups to mention the types of waste they produce in 
the home and at school, e.g. paper, rubber, bottles, etc. 
 Write learners’ ideas on the board and let them brainstorm on what will 
happen if the wastes they produce are not separated. 
 Evaluate learners by asking them to perform individual tasks, e.g. by writing 
down four practical ways of sustaining the environment. 
 
Project: Design Litterbins to hold different forms of waste. 
Learners make or mould litterbins and other equipment from suitable materials for 
holding different types of waste. 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-Solving 
Collaboration and communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing 
Predicting 
Evaluating 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Designing experiment, 
Analysing, Generalising 
Generating 
 

 
14 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 2: DISEASES 
      
CONTENT 
STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.2.1 Know 
common diseases of 
humans; causes, 
symptoms, effects and 
prevention 
B4.5.2.1.1 Identify causes, symptoms and prevention of measles 
 Learners watch pictures, videos or charts on causes, symptoms and 
prevention of measles or invite a health personnel or School Health 
Education Programme (SHEP) coordinator to give a talk on measles. 
 
 In pairs, learners answer the following questions based on the pictures and 
videos: (1) What causes measles? (2) What are the symptoms of measles? 
(3) What should be done if someone is exposed to measles? (4) What are 
the ways of preventing the spread of measles? 
 
Project: Learners develop concept maps to show the causes, symptoms and prevention 
of measles.  Learners develop posters to talk about how they can prevent measles.  
           
B4.5.2.1.2. Demonstrate understanding of the causes, symptoms and 
prevention of food-borne diseases 
 Learners watch pictures and videos on causes, symptoms and prevention of 
food borne diseases. 
 Invite a health personnel, SHEP coordinator or personnel from the Food 
and Drugs Authority (FDA) to give a talk on food-borne diseases. 
 In pairs, let learners respond to the following questions: 
 (1). What causes food-borne diseases? (2). What are the symptoms of 
food-borne diseases? (3). What should be done if someone contracts a 
food-borne disease? 
 In pairs, learners give examples of food-borne diseases in their localities, i.e. 
cholera, diarrhoea, typhoid fever, etc. 
 Learners predict what will happen when someone contracts a food-borne 
disease. 
 Evaluate learners by asking them to prepare posters on the prevention and 
control of food-borne. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-Solving 
Collaboration and communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing 
Predicting 
Evaluating 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-Solving 
Collaboration and communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Evaluating 
Generating 
Analysing 

 
15 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 4:  CLIMATE CHANGE 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B4.5.4.1 Know that 
climate change is one of 
the most important 
environmental issues 
facing the world today 
B4.5.4.1.1 Explain that burning is one of the causes of climate change 
 Learners watch pictures and videos or charts showing burning of fossil fuel and 
changing weather pattern. 
 Narrate to learners a story of a bush fire and the effect it has on humans, plants, 
animals and property. 
 Learners, in groups discuss what happens when burning occurs. 
 Learners present their ideas, i.e. burning brings out smoke, makes air dirty or 
unclean, etc. 
 Brainstorm with learners on what will happen if there is continuous burning of 
vegetation and waste. 
 Evaluate learners by asking them to design posters on the effect of burning on 
climate change. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-Solving 
Collaboration and communication. 
Personal Development and Leadership  
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Predicting 
Evaluating 
Analysing 
Generalising 
 
 

 
16 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
BASIC 5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 BASIC 5 
STRAND 1: DIVERSTY OF MATTER 
SUB-STRAND 1: LIVING AND NON-LIVING THINGS 
CONTENT STANDARDS INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.1.1 Understand the 
physical features and life 
processes of living things 
and use this 
understanding to classify 
them 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.1.1.1.1 Know the life processes of living things (growth, sensitivity to the 
environment, respiration and excretion) 
 Learners go outside the classroom to observe and identify various living and non-living 
things and discuss their observation. 
 Engage learners to watch pictures or animated videos of different living things (e.g. birds, 
insects, trees, reptiles, mammals, etc.) and comment on them.  
 Ask learners to identify the names of the living things from the video. 
 Use relevant examples and illustrations to demonstrate or explain sensitivity, respiration 
and excretion as life processes. 
 Learners go on a nature walk to observe sensitivity in the mimosa plant when touched.  
 Assist learners to understand growth by observing a seedling and a mature plant of the 
same kind. 
 Let learners breathe air in and out to demonstrate respiration. 
 
NB: Plants show movement within their parts and animals move from place to place. 
Project: Learners plant a seed and observe its growth pattern.  
 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Analysing 
Generalising 
Evaluating 
 
B5.1.1.2 Demonstrate 
understanding of the 
differences between living 
things, non-living things, 
and things which have 
never been alive 
B5.1.1.2.1 Compare the differences among things that are living, dead and things that 
have never been alive 
 Assemble living things (e.g. plants, insects, etc.), non-living things (e.g. firewood, pencils, 
paper, etc.) and things that have never lived (rocks, soil, water, etc.) for class activities.   
 
NB: Wear protectives when gathering specimen. 
 
 Learners observe and comment on the samples.  
 Learners, in an activity, classify the provided specimen as (1) Things that are alive (2) Once 
alive or (3) Never been alive. 
Learners are guided to compare the differences among things that are alive, once alive or 
never been alive. 
  Learners explain why they (learners) are classified as living things. 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Analysing, Generalising, 
Evaluating 
 

 
18 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 2: MATERIALS 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.2.1 Recognise 
materials as important 
resources for providing 
human needs 
B5.1.2.1.1 Classify everyday materials based on their properties (soft, hard, rough, 
smooth, opaque, transparent and bendable) 
 
 Learners are asked to collect and bring a variety of everyday materials from the home, 
school and community. Examples should include cotton wool, pieces of cloth, pieces of 
paper, cardboard, wood, plastics, polythene bags (coloured and transparent), soil 
samples, marbles (rough and smooth) chalk, crayon, pen and straw.  
 Learners are assisted to sort and group the materials based on texture (hard or soft), 
and size (big or small).  
 Demonstrate by assisting learners to group materials into those that we can see 
through (transparent) and those that we cannot see through (opaque). 
 Learners sort the materials into those that can bend and those that cannot bend.  
 Learners feel and draw materials that are hard, soft, smooth, etc. 
 Learners are tasked to display their drawings in class for discussion.  
 Learners are assisted to know that the properties of a given material enable it to be 
used for making certain products, e.g. clay is used for making pots because it can be 
moulded without breaking. raffia palm is used in basketry because it can bend easily.  
  Learners work in groups to classify different materials based on various similarities 
and differences.  
Project: Learners use different materials to create new items such as paper fans, toy cars, toy planes, 
cooking pans, hats and earthenware pots and bowls and exhibit their work. 
 
Core Competencies 
Communication and Collaboration 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and leadership 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Generalising 
Classifying 
 
B5.1.2.2 Know that 
substances can exist in 
different physical states 
(solid, liquid, gas). Many 
substances can be 
changed from one state 
to another by heating or 
cooling 
 
B5.1.2.2.1 Know that some changes are reversible, while others cannot be reversed 
 Provide substances such as candle wax, shea butter, water, paper and a source of heat. 
 In groups learners undertake the following activities (e.g. melting of candle wax, 
melting of ice, melting of shea butter, heating of water, crumpling of paper, melting of 
plastics, burning of paper, burning of wood, etc.). 
 Learners, in their groups, talk about their observations.  
 Assist learners to classify the activities as (1) lead to the formation of a new thing, (2) 
no new thing formed. 
 Assist learners to understand that changes where no new thing is formed are 
reversible, while changes where new things are formed are usually not reversible. 
NB: Hazardous chemicals and solutions should not be used. 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Generalising 
Classifying 

 
19 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.1.2.3 Understand 
mixtures, the types, 
formation, uses and 
ways of separating them 
into their components 
B5.1.2.3.1 Demonstrate formation and separation of mixtures (solid-liquid and 
liquid-liquid mixtures) 
 Display some solid and liquid substances for learners to observe, e.g. water, common 
salt, vinegar, sugar, sand, cooking oil and soft drinks. 
 Put learners in groups and ask them to add each of the substances to a separate 
quantity of water whilst stirring and observe what happens. 
 Learners describe the material combinations they have produced, i.e. as solid-liquid 
mixture, liquid-liquid mixture or a solution.   
 Learners find out the difference between a mixture of sand and water and a mixture of 
salt and water.   
 Learners also differentiate between the mixture of water and soft drink and the 
mixture of water and cooking oil.   
 Put learners into groups to demonstrate how to recover the salt from the salt 
solution.  
 Assist learners to separate different solid-liquid mixtures and liquid-liquid mixtures 
using separation methods such as filtration, evaporation, sieving and use of separating 
funnel. 
 
Project: Separation of solid- liquid mixture 
 Learners separate a mixture of sand and water using appropriate materials.   
 
NB: Improvised separation equipment can be used to effectively separate various mixtures 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Generating 
Reporting 
 
 
 
 
 

 
20 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 2: CYCLES 
SUB-STRAND 1: EARTH SCIENCE 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.1.1 Recognise 
that some events in 
our environment 
occur recurrently   
B5.2.1.1.1 Know how day and night are formed  
 Assemble materials such as polystyrene (plastic) balls, football, ice-cream stick, 
torch, pen and globe.  
 Learners are assisted to understand the terms, rotation and axis using a ball.   
 Explain how the motion of the earth causes day and night, with the aid of a 
globe. 
 Learners observe a demonstration of day and night, using appropriate materials, 
e.g. globe of the earth, blu tac, and lamp without shade and a dark room. 
 Learners, in their groups, demonstrate the formation of day and night using, 
polystyrene balls, ice-cream stick, torch, pen and globe.  
 Learners explain how day and night come about and draw diagrams to represent 
their work. 
Core Competencies 
Creativity and innovation 
Cultural identity and Global Citizenship 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Designing Experiment 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Representing 
B5.2.1.2 Recognise 
the relationship 
between the earth 
and the sun 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.2.1.3 Show 
understanding of the 
roles of condensation, 
evaporation, 
transpiration and 
precipitation in the 
hydrological (water) 
cycle 
B5.2.1.2.1 Describe the benefits of the sun to the earth 
 Put learners into groups to discuss the benefits the earth derives from the sun.  
 Learners, in their groups, present their findings. These may include the following; 
the sun provides warmth to the earth, light for plants to grow well, provides day 
and night cycles and energy. 
 Learners brainstorm on what will happen if there was no sun. 
 
 
Project: Importance of the sun to plant growth. 
Learners demonstrate the importance of sunlight to the growth of plants.  
 
B5.2.1.3.1 Demonstrate evaporation and condensation as important processes 
of the hydrological (water) cycle 
 Learners recite poems and rhymes involving the environment and water. 
 In groups, learners demonstrate evaporation and condensation, e.g. learners observe 
water drying off their wet hands (evaporation), covering water with a lid and 
observing water droplets on the lid after some time (evaporation & condensation). 
 Demonstrate evaporation by heating water until it boils (to be done by the teacher), 
then covering the boiling water with a sheet of transparent glass. Water vapour 
condenses on transparent glass (condensation). 
 Learners are assisted to understand how evaporation and condensation lead to the 
formation of rain. 
 Display pictures or simple diagrams of the water cycle showing evaporation and 
 condensation. 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing, Evaluating 
Communicating 
Designing Experiment 
 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
Personal Development and Leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Subject Specific Practices  
Observing, Experimenting, 
Recording, Generalising 
 
 
 

 
21 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.1.3 Show 
understanding of the 
roles of condensation, 
evaporation, 
transpiration and 
precipitation in the 
hydrological (water) 
cycle  
CONT’D 
B5.2.1.3.2 Know how clouds are formed 
 Review composition of air with learners. This should include water vapour. 
 Ask learners the question: what are clouds? And assists learners to come out 
with this explanation:  clouds consist of many tiny water droplets resulting from 
the condensation of water vapour into liquid water or ice.  
 Explain that upward vertical motion of air through the atmosphere cools water 
vapour to form clouds. 
 Learners demonstrate formation of clouds in a bottle.  
 Learners explain why clouds are not formed close to the surface of the ground. 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Manipulating, Analysing 
Evaluating, Communicating 
B5.2.1.4 Demonstrate 
understanding of how 
carbon and nitrogen 
are cycled in nature 
 
 
 
 
 
B5.2.1.4.1 Describe the uses of carbon dioxide and its effects on humans and 
life on earth 
 Learners mention the components of air (this should include carbon dioxide).  
 Learners are assisted in groups to answer the following questions: What is 
carbon dioxide? What is carbon dioxide used for? How does carbon dioxide get 
into the environment? Does carbon dioxide have adverse health effects? Does 
carbon dioxide have adverse effects on the environment? 
 Learners are assisted to identify some common uses of carbon dioxide such as 
for making fire extinguishers, fizzy drinks and for the process of food preparation 
in plants. 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Communication 
 
 
B5.2.1.5 Recognise 
water and air as 
important natural 
resources 
B5.2.1.5.1 Identify human activities that make water unsuitable for human use 
 Begin by discussing the qualities of good drinking water and dangers of using 
unsafe water. 
 Learners, in groups, identify human activities that make water unsuitable for use, 
e.g. toxic waste disposal, sewage disposal, deforestation, mining, littering, 
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizer application and agricultural practices. 
 Learners brainstorm to come out with ways of preventing, minimizing and 
controlling water pollution. 
Project: Task learners to work in groups to create concept maps on the causes, control 
and prevention of water pollution. 
Core Competencies 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Creativity and Innovation 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing, Predicting, Analysing 
Evaluating, Communicating 

 
22 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B5.2.1.5 Recognise 
water and air as 
important natural 
resources 
B5.2.1.5.2 Know how to make and keep air clean in our environment 
 Find out from learners what they understand by clean air and review things that 
pollute air (make air unclean) such as smoke from factories, car exhausts, bush 
burning and dust from construction sites and untarred roads. 
 Lead discussions to come out with the do’s and don’ts that will make or keep air 
clean in our homes and surrounding environment (planting of trees and grass and 
avoiding frequent and uncontrolled burning). 
  Learners are assigned to design a concept map on the causes, prevention and 
control of air pollution. 
 Learners draw and use a Future’s Wheel to trace the effects of water pollution 
on the environment. 
Core Competencies 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration 
Creativity and Innovation 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing, Predicting, Analysing 
Evaluating, Communicating 
 
SUB-STRAND 2: LIFE CYCLES OF ORGANISMS 
 
 
 
B5.2.2.1 Demonstrate 
understanding of life 
cycle of a plant 
B5.2.2.1.1 Relate structure of the parts of a plant (leaves, stem, root, flower) 
to the functions they perform 
 Discuss functions of parts of plants with learners. 
  Learners go on a nature walk to uproot young plants from school surroundings 
and bring them to class. 
 Learners, in groups, observe parts of the plants and relate them to the functions 
they perform, e.g. the thin and large surface area of leaves and the presence of 
green colouring matter enhance their work. The roots are for anchorage and 
absorption of nutrients from the soil. The stem supports the upper part of the 
plant; conduct water and minerals from the roots to the leaves; carry food from 
leaves to other parts of the plant. 
 Learners draw and colour a plant and label the parts. 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Generalising 
 
 
 B5.2. 2.1.2 Compare the differences in germination of bean and maize seeds 
 Learners are assisted to review the previous knowledge on seed germination.  
 Put learners in groups and provide them with dry beans and maize seeds. 
 Learners are assisted to plant the bean and maize seeds using transparent 
containers and soil. 
 Learners are guided to observe (1) the dry seed (2) when it absorbs water and 
swells (3) rapturing of the seed coat (4) sprouting of the root (5) sprouting of 
the stem and seed leaves (6) the elongation of the root and stem. 
 Learners find out where the seed leaves (cotyledons) remain, inside the soil or 
above the soil. 
NB: This activity will take some days. 
Core Competencies 
Personal Development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Manipulating, 
Analysing, Classifying, Generalising 

 
23 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 3: SYSTEMS   
SUB-STRAND1:  THE HUMAN BODY SYSTEMS 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.1.1 Recognise 
that different parts of 
the human body work 
interdependently to 
perform a specific 
function 
B5.3.1.1.1 Know the parts of the respiratory system in humans  
 Introduce the lesson with songs on the parts of the body, e.g. head, shoulders, 
knees and toes.  
 Ask learners to breathe in and out for some time. 
 Relate the act of breathing to the respiratory system and guide learners to 
identify the organs of the system using charts or models. 
 Use role-play to guide learners to identify the functions of each part (different 
learners assume and role-play the functions of parts of the respiratory system, 
e.g. Ama is the lungs and Amina is the diaphragm). 
 Engage learners in an activity to design a breathing model using plastic bags, 
balloons, rubber bands and polythene bags. 
 Learners draw and label the respiratory system and state its function.  
  Learners are tasked to find out the diseases and lifestyles that affect the 
respiratory system adversely. 
Project: Assist learners to design an improvised breathing apparatus using plastics. 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-Solving 
Creativity and Innovation 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Analysing 
Classifying 
Communicating 
Designing 
Interpreting 
 
SUB-STRAND 2:  THE SOLAR SYSTEM  
B5.3.2.1 Show 
understanding of the 
orderliness of the sun, 
planets and satellites 
in the solar system, as 
well as the important 
role of the sun in the 
existence of the solar 
system 
B5.3.2.1.1 Identify the components of the solar system (sun, earth, moon, 
other planets, satellite) 
 Present learners with a chart, model or video depicting the solar system or draw 
the  solar  system  on  the  board, using  different  colours  to  illustrate  the  different 
bodies. 
 Learners recite the poem, “I see the moon, and the moon sees me”.  
 Initiate a discussion on the importance of the sun to life on earth.  
 Explain  to the  learners  that  the earth orbits  (moves  around)  the  sun, leading  to 
changes in seasons (it takes a year for the earth to move around the sun). 
 Learners are made to understand that heavenly bodies that move around the sun 
are called planets.  
 Learners observe the planet Venus, the brightest object in the sky before sunset 
or several hours after sunrise.  
 Learners are guided to role- play the sun and the planets in the solar system. 
 Share folktales about the sun and moon with learners. 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Personal development and leadership 
Communication and Collaboration. 
 
 

 
24 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.3.2.1 Show 
understanding of the 
orderliness of the sun, 
planets and satellites in 
the solar system, as 
well as the important 
role of the sun in the 
existence of the solar 
system 
CONT’D 
 Learners should understand that all the planets move around the sun. 
 Learners to observe the planet Venus, the brightest object in the sky before 
sunset or several hours after sunrise.  
 
Project: Planning, designing and making a model of the Solar System 
        Learners build a model of the solar system using suitable materials such as blu 
 tack, clay, cardboard and wood. etc. 
 
 
SUB-STRAND 3: ECOSYSTEM 
 
B5.3.3.1 Show 
understanding of 
ecosystem, 
interdependency of 
organisms in an 
ecosystem and 
appreciate the 
interactions  
B5.3.3.1.1 Know how various organisms are adapted to survive in their 
habitat  
 Begin the lesson with a matching activity using flashcards (write the names of 
different organisms on flashcards and a list of habitats on another set of 
flashcards for learners to match with). 
 Learners explain why a bird cannot live in water.  
 Learners discuss various habitats of animals and plants. 
 Brainstorm with learners to come out with the meaning of the term habitat. 
 Learners are asked to give examples of animals that live in water, land and 
trees. 
 Learners are assisted to discuss how various organisms adapt to their habitat, 
e.g. what enables fish to live in rivers, birds to live on trees? 
Project: Designing a habitat  
  Learners plan, design and make a model of a habitat using card board, paper, blu tack 
and clay to show the homes of some animals. 
Core Competencies 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Generalising 
Designing 
Interpreting 
 
 
 
 

 
25 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
 
STRAND 4: FORCES AND ENERGY  
SUB-STRAND 1: SOURCES AND FORMS OF ENERGY 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.1.1 Demonstrate 
understanding of the 
concept of energy, its 
various forms and 
sources and the ways 
in which it can be 
transformed and 
conserved 
 
 
B5.4.1.1.1 Explain how energy is transformed from one form to another  
 Explore learners’ previous knowledge on the forms of energy (e.g. Electrical, heat, 
light, sound). 
 Use some common devices (e.g. torch, radio, television, etc.) to demonstrate 
transformation of energy. 
 Learners discuss energy transformations that take place in the school, e.g. ringing 
of bell, beating of gong-gong, drumming, etc. 
 In groups, learner’s identity other forms of energy transformations in the school 
community and present their findings for discussion in the class. 
 Learners design a flow chart to explain how energy from the sun is transformed 
into energy for walking. 
 
B5.4.1.1.2   Know how to use electricity efficiently in the home 
 Learners mention names of things that use electricity in the home. 
 Brainstorm with learners to come out with how they use the electrical gadgets. 
 Learners talk about what will happen if electrical gadgets are not switched off when 
not in use. 
 Elaborate on and link learners’ ideas with the issue of power outages and crisis 
which come as a result of the efficient use of electricity in our homes and 
industries. 
 Learners, in a think-pair-share activity, identify how they can use electricity 
efficiently in the home, community and school. e.g. ironing in bulk, putting off 
television sets and freezers when ironing, using energy-efficient bulbs and other 
electrical gadgets with higher energy efficient ratings: (more stars imply higher 
energy efficiency). 
 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Manipulating, 
Analysing, Evaluating, 
Classifying, Designing and 
Interpreting 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Cultural identity and global 
citizenship. 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration. 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing, Evaluating 
Manipulating 

 
26 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.1.2 Show 
understanding of the 
concept of heat 
energy in terms of its 
importance, effects, 
sources and transfer 
from one medium to 
another 
 
 
B5.4.1.2.1 Show the relationship between heat and temperature 
 Review previous lesson on temperature with learners. 
 In a group discussion, learners find out what will happen when heat is applied to a 
substance or lost from a substance, e.g. when a substance is placed in the sun for a 
while or when a substance is put in a fridge.  
 Learners undertake an activity of placing objects such as metal plates, pieces of 
stone in the sun.  
 Learners initially touch the objects to feel their degree of warmness before they 
are put in the sun.  
 After 20 minutes, learners touch the objects again and feel the difference in 
temperature. 
 Learners should then place the stones or metals in a bowl of water and afterwards, 
touch again to determine whether they become hotter or colder. 
 Elaborate on learners’ ideas, emphasising heat as the factor that changes 
temperature. 
 Summarise lesson by explaining to learners that when heat is lost, temperature 
reduces, when heat is gained, temperature increases. 
 
B1.4.1.2.2 Measure and record temperature using thermometer 
 Guide learners, in groups, to produce their own improvised thermometers using 
plastic bottles, plastic straws, dyes and water. 
 If available, bring clinical and laboratory thermometers to class. 
 Learners recall their previous knowledge on the concept, “temperature”.  
 Learners discuss the relationship between hotness and coldness in terms of heat 
transfer, (when an object loses heat, it cools and when it gains heat, it becomes 
warm or hot). 
 Learners identify the instrument used for measuring the amount of heat in a body 
and give examples of places where the thermometer is used. 
 Learners are assisted to use the clinical thermometer to measure and record their 
body temperatures and the laboratory thermometer to measure the temperature 
of warm water. 
 
Core Competencies 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Generalising 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Classifying            
Observing 
Recording 
Manipulating 

 
27 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
SUB-STRAND 2: ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.2.1 
Demonstrate 
knowledge of 
generation of 
electricity, its 
transmission and 
transformation into 
other forms 
B5.4.2.1.1 Identify the components of an electric circuit and their functions 
 Begin by asking learners what comes into their minds when they hear the term, 
‘electric circuit’ 
 Learners watch pictures and videos of simple electrical circuits and how they work. 
 Learners, in groups, construct simple electric circuits using connecting wire, dry 
cells and a bulb/LED to light up the bulb.  
 Assist learners to identify the components and their uses. 
 Learners find out other materials that can be used in place of dry cells, connecting 
wires and bulb. 
 
Project: Learners build an LED lantern using the above circuit and plastic bottle. 
Core Competencies 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Communicating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
28 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
SUB STRAND 3: FORCES AND MOVEMENT 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.4.3.1 Know that 
movement is caused 
by applied forces 
due to the release of 
stored energy 
 
B5.4.3.1.1 Explain the term, “friction”, its effects and applications 
 Review the previous lesson on forces with learners. 
 Learners recall some examples of forces and their effects/applications. 
 Learners explain why cars usually drive slowly on wet roads. 
 Task them to explain what happens when one accidentally step into an oil spill on 
the floor. 
 Ask learners these questions: What is friction?  What does it do? How does it 
work?  
 Then discuss their prior knowledge of the topic. 
 Learners rub their palms together for several sections and talk about what they 
notice. 
 Explain to learners that the warmth they feel is caused by a force called friction 
and that friction is the force that opposes the movement of two surfaces against 
each other.   
 Some learners remove their shoes to show the shrunken heels/soles as an example 
of the effect of friction between the sole of the shoe and the ground which one 
walks on.  
 Emphasise the fact that it is because of the friction between the shoes and the 
ground that we do not fall whilst walking or running. 
 Explain to learners again that on a rainy day or on a smooth/polished surface, 
friction is reduced, which means the shoes of the one walking or the tyres of the 
car are not firmly gripped to the ground or the road because friction has reduced. 
Thus, this is what causes people to fall or slip on oily or wet surfaces.  
 
Project: Investigating the effect of friction 
            Learners demonstrate the effect of friction by using a toy car on rough and smooth         
 surfaces.  
Core Competencies 
Creativity and innovation 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration. 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Predicting 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Generalising 
Communicating 
Designing 
 
 

 
29 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
STRAND 5: HUMANS AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
 SUB-STRAND 1:  PERSONAL HYGIENE AND SANITATION 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.1.1 Recognise 
the importance of 
personal hygiene 
B5.5.1.1.1 Know why it is important to wash clothes regularly 
 Engage learners in groups to discuss among themselves what items are needed to 
wash their clothes and underwear. 
 Groups present their ideas to the whole class. 
 Present to learners, real items (soap, water, dirty clothes, etc.) needed to wash 
clothes and underwear and demonstrate how washing is done. 
 Learners demonstrate how washing is done (a learner from each group). 
 Engage learners to watch a video or pictures showing other methods of washing 
clothes and underwear, apart from the hands. 
 In pairs, learners share ideas on what will happen if they don’t wash their clothes 
and underwear regularly. 
 Guide learners to design personal roster for washing their clothes, indicating the 
days and times which they will use to wash their dirty clothes. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and 
communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
Creativity and Innovation 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing  
Manipulating 
Analysing  
Evaluating 
Designing 
Creating 
B5.5.1.2 Identify, 
discuss and 
appreciate the 
natural and human 
features of the 
environment and 
the need to keep the 
environment clean 
B5.5.1.2.1   Know how to keep washrooms clean 
 Learners watch pictures and videos on how to keep washrooms clean. 
 Engage them in a discussion on how to keep the lavatory clean. 
 Emphasise such key points as: flushing immediately after use, urinating directly in 
the toilet bowl, keeping used tissues in waste containers rather than throwing 
them on the floor, regularly removing used tissues and burning them. 
 Learners investigate the risks associated with the use of dirty washrooms. 
 Evaluate learners by asking them to design a poster to be pasted in their school’s 
washroom. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and 
Communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing  
Analysing  
Evaluating 
 

 
30 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.1.2 Identify, 
discuss and 
appreciate the 
natural and human 
features of the 
environment and 
the need to keep 
the environment 
clean 
B5.5.1.2.2 Demonstrate how to clean the environment regularly    
 Assemble various items for cleaning the environment. 
 Begin the lesson with a song on cleanliness.  
 Take the learners on a trip to observe tidy and untidy parts of the nearby 
community or show different pictures depicting clean and unclean environments. 
 Engage learners to discuss how to make the unclean environments as clean as those 
that are clean. 
 Learners discuss some materials that are used for cleaning the home, the school and 
the community. 
 Demonstrate to learners the correct way of using the cleaning tools, e.g. brooms, 
rags, ceiling brush, dustpans and dustbins. 
 Learners are assisted to know the need to keep the environment clean. 
 Engage learners to use local cleaning tools to clean the classroom and the school 
environment. 
 
Project:  
             Learners design posters to create awareness on the need to keep the school, home and 
             Community clean and exhibit their work in the school. 
NB:   Teachers are encouraged to form an environmental awareness club in the class 
after this lesson. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Cultural Identity and Global 
Citizenship 
Collaboration and 
communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Creativity and Innovation 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing, Manipulating, 
Analysing, Evaluating, Designing, 
Interpreting, Communicating 
  
SUB-STRAND 2:  DISEASES 
 
B5.5.2.1 Know 
common diseases 
of humans; causes, 
symptoms, effects 
and prevention 
B5.5.2.1.1 Explain the causes, symptoms and control of chicken pox 
 Learners watch pictures, videos or charts on causes, symptoms and control of 
chicken pox or invite a health personnel or School Health Education Programme 
(SHEP) coordinator to give a talk on chicken pox. 
 In pairs, learners answer the following questions based on the pictures and video: (1) 
What causes chicken pox? (2) What are the symptoms of chicken pox? (3) What 
should be done if someone has chicken pox? (4) What are the ways of preventing 
the spread of chicken pox? 
Project: Learners develop a concept map to trace the causes, symptoms and prevention of 
chicken pox.  
 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and 
communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing, Evaluating 
Designing, Interpreting 
 

 
31 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
SUB-STRAND 2:  DISEASES 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.2.1 Know 
common diseases 
of humans; causes, 
symptoms, effects 
and prevention 
B5.5.2.1.2 Identify causes, symptoms and prevention of cholera 
 Learners watch pictures and videos or images showing the causes, symptoms and 
prevention of cholera. 
 Invite a local health officer or SHEP coordinator to give a presentation on cholera to 
the learners. 
 Engage learners, in groups, to discuss the causes of cholera, using everyday 
scenarios, e.g. eating contaminated food and living in a dirty environment. 
 Learners are provided one large cardboard for all the groups to write different ideas 
on the causes, prevention and symptoms of cholera.  
 Learners display the cardboard in the classroom. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and 
communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
Subject Specific Practices 
Analysing  
Generating 
 
SUB STRAND 3: SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY 
 
B5.5.3.1 Recognise 
the impact of 
science and 
technology in 
society 
 
B5.5.3.1.1 Identify the raw materials used in some local industries (kenkey 
production, gari production, ceramic and pottery production) 
 Take learners to a local gari, kenkey, shea butter, cooking oil, blacksmith, basketry, 
carpentry or pottery production site or show videos of such ventures. 
 Learners observe critically and identify the raw materials used in the various 
industries. 
 Engage the learners in a matching activity to match some local products with their 
raw materials. 
 
Project: Designing an Industry. 
              Learners plan and design a factory in their locality, showing the raw materials they use and 
 the finished products. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and 
communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing  
Analysing  
Evaluating  
Planning 
Designing 
Interpreting 
 
 

 
32 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 4:  CLIMATE CHANGE 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B5.5.4.1 Know that 
climate change is 
one of the most 
important 
environmental 
issues facing the 
world today  
 
B5.5.4.1.1 Identify the impact of deforestation on climate change  
 Put learners into groups and let them discuss the importance of trees in the 
environment. 
 Take them on a trip around the school environs and help them to appreciate 
the importance of trees such as provision of shade, food, fresh air, production 
of rain, etc.     
 Learners brainstorm on what will happen if people continuously cut down 
trees.  
 Engage each group to present their ideas to the whole class and re-shape their 
ideas by writing all key points on tree-felling and its impact to the environment 
as well as its long-term effect on the climate. 
 Learners brainstorm on what measures to take to stop people from tree-
cutting. 
 Learners are assisted to plant trees in their school environment and at strategic 
locations within the community.  
 Learners are supervised to take good care of the trees they plant.  
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and communication 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing  
Analysing  
Evaluating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
BASIC 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
34 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
BASIC 6 
 
STRAND 1: DIVERSITY OF MATTER 
 
SUB-STRAND 1: LIVING AND NON-LIVING THINGS 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.1.1 Show 
understanding of the 
physical features 
and life processes of 
living things and use 
this understanding 
to classify them 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B6.1.1.1.1 Classify plants based on their root system 
 Review previous lesson on parts of a plant with learners (stem, root, leaves and 
flowers). 
 Learners uproot young plants (e.g. grass, beans, mango, cassava and sweet 
potato) and bring to class. 
 Learners are shown pictures of the root systems of different plants.  
 Learners observe and identify the similarities and differences between the roots 
of the various plants. 
 Task learners to put the plants into two main groups based on the similarities in 
their roots system. 
 Learners give reasons for their classifications. 
 Build the vocabulary of learners by explaining to them the two main root systems 
of plants, namely; tap roots and fibrous roots. 
 Learners to mould tap root and fibrous root using blu tack and display for 
discussion.  
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Subject Specific 
Competencies 
Observing 
Communicating 
Planning 
Analysing 
Designing 
Interpreting 
 SUB-STRAND 2: MATERIALS  
B6.1.2.1 Recognise 
materials as 
important resources 
for providing human 
needs 
B6.1.2.1.1 Know the general properties of metals such as lustre, malleability, 
conductivity and ductility 
 Learners, in groups, gather different objects such as ruler, erasers, exercise 
books, comb, plastic bowls, connecting wires, cups, plates, cooking pans, roofing 
sheets, iron nails, pins, etc. 
  Learners classify the various materials as metals or non-metals based on the 
following properties: lustre, malleability, conductivity and ductility.  
 Learners give reasons for their classification. 
 Relate the lesson to everyday activities that involve the use of metals. 
 Given a piece of aluminium foil and a drinking straw, learners describe how they 
will use conductivity to classify them as metals or non-metals. 
 Learners design and make simple machines with metals. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Digital Literacy 
Communication & Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Communicating 
Analysing 
Generalising 
 

 
35 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS SUBJECT SPECIFIC PRACTICES 
AND CORE COMPETENCIES 
B6.1.2.1 Recognise 
materials as 
important resources 
for providing human 
needs 
 
CONT’D 
B6.1.2.1.2 Investigate the uses of metals in everyday life and link the uses 
to their properties 
 Display different objects made from metals.  
 Engage learners in groups to write names of the objects and present their 
answers in class. 
  Learners, through discussion, come out with uses of metals by observing 
the objects displayed in class or from a video (these include farm tools, 
jewellery, ornaments, cars, bridges, metallic spoons). 
 Link the use of the metal to its property, e.g. copper is used to make wires 
because it conducts electricity, aluminium is used to make roofing sheets 
because it is malleable. 
 Relate the lesson to everyday life to promote curiosity.    
 
 
 
 
B6.1.2.2 Understand 
mixtures, the types 
of formation, uses 
and ways of 
separating them 
into their 
components 
 
B6.1.2.2.1 Examine some uses of mixtures in everyday life 
 Review previous lesson on mixtures with learners. 
 Learners watch videos and pictures of different types of mixtures. 
 Provide samples of materials and guide learners to produce mixtures such 
as salt solution, sugar solution, concrete, sand and water. 
 In groups, learners investigate the daily uses and applications of mixtures, 
e.g. salt solution, sugar solution, concrete, gari and beans. 
 Engage learners to write the names of the components of the mixtures 
stated. 
 Learners mention other examples of mixtures and their daily uses. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-Solving 
Digital Literacy 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific Competencies 
Observing, Communicating 
Analysing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
36 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 2: CYCLES  
SUB-STRAND 1: EARTH SCIENCE 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.1.1 Recognise 
the relationship 
between the earth 
and the sun 
 
B6.2.1.1.1 Describe the relative sizes of the earth and sun and their 
importance 
 
 Prior to the lesson, task learners to investigate the relative size of the sun in 
relation to its function in the solar system.   
 Each group presents a report in class for discussion. 
 Learners answer the following questions: (1) Which is bigger, the sun or the 
earth? (2) Which of the two bodies move, the sun or the earth? 
 Evaluate learners by asking: “if the earth was bigger than the sun, how would 
that affect the length of day and night?” 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Communication and Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Designing Experiment 
Planning, Communicating 
Observing  
 Analysing 
B6.2.1.2 Show 
understanding of the 
roles of 
condensation, 
evaporation, 
transpiration and 
precipitation in the 
hydrological (water) 
cycle 
B6.2.1.2.1 Explain how rain falls from clouds 
 Review formation of clouds with learners. 
 Lead learners to explain the terms: “evaporation, condensation, dew point, ice, 
cloud, gravity and precipitation”. 
 Learners, in an activity, design a model showing the formation of raindrops 
around tiny spots of dust or smoke and falling from high parts of a cloud. 
 Explain that not all clouds result in rainfall. 
 
Core Competencies 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Planning 
 
B6.2.1.3 
Demonstrate 
understanding of 
how carbon and 
nitrogen are cycled 
in nature 
2.1.3.1 Know the functions of carbon within the environment 
 Review previous lesson on the functions of carbon dioxide with learners.  
 Learners are assisted to discuss the following questions: (1) materials in the 
environment that contain carbon; (2) the role of carbon in those materials. 
 Learners use role-play to understand the function of carbon within the 
environment, e.g. the function of carbon in relation to pencils, charcoal, food 
and carbon dioxide.  
Core Competencies 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Planning 
 
 
 

 
37 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.2.1.4 Recognise 
water and air as 
important natural 
resources 
B6.2.1.4.1 Investigate ways of conserving water in the home, school and 
community 
 Discuss qualities of good drinking water and ways of making water safe for use 
with learners, e.g. sedimentation, boiling, filtration, adding alum, etc. 
 Learners identify activities in the home that require the use of water.  
 Learners write various activities which portray the right use of water in the 
home and other activities that show the wastage of water. 
 Discuss ways of using water wisely and efficiently in the home and community 
with learners.  
  Learners create a flyer or posters on water conservation with cut-out pictures 
and phrases on how to conserve water. 
 
B6.2.1.5.2 Demonstrate that air supports burning 
 Review composition of air and the uses of the components 
 Learners, in groups, use simple experiments to show that air supports burning, 
using a lighted candle and a glass jar (or an improvised jar). 
Core Competencies 
Communication and Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Planning 
 
 SUB-STRAND 2: LIFE CYCLES OF ORGANISMS 
 
 
B6.2.2.1 
Demonstrate 
understanding of the 
life cycle of a plant 
B6.2.2.1.1 Know the materials needed for the survival of plants in the 
environment (water, carbon dioxide, oxygen, sunlight) 
 Review previous lesson on composition and uses of air. 
 Prior to the lesson, learners investigate the materials required for plant survival. 
 Learners present their findings on the materials required for plant survival. 
 Using annotated diagrams, learners show sources and point of entry of the 
essential materials into the plants. 
 Learners are guided to conduct an experiment to show the effect of water on 
plants’ survival.  
 Learners are assigned to find out the specific functions of oxygen, carbon 
dioxide, sunlight and water in the survival of plants. 
 
B6.2.2.1.2 Observe the life cycle of a plant (okra or maize plant) 
 Guide learners to plant viable maize and okra seeds and care for them until 
they bear fruits.  
 Learners observe the growing plants weekly and record the changes that take 
place until other viable seeds are produced.  
 Learners write a report based on their observations. 
Core Competencies 
Communication and Collaboration 
Critical Thinking and Problem-
Solving 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Recording 
Analysing 
Planning 
Designing  
Manipulating 
Measuring 
Evaluating 
 
 

 
38 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 3: SYSTEMS  
SUB-STRAND 1: THE HUMAN BODY SYSTEMS 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.3.1.1 Recognise 
that different parts of 
the human body work 
interdependently to 
perform a specific 
function 
B6.3.1.1.1 Explain the functions of organs in the excretory system of humans 
 Engage learners to review the functions of some human organs. 
 Learners explain the need for activities such as breathing, urinating and sweating. 
 With the aid of videos, charts or models, assist learners to identify the organs of 
the excretory system of humans (kidneys, lungs, skin, liver). 
 Learners, in an activity, match the parts of the excretory system with their 
excretory products. 
 Build vocabulary of learners by explaining key biological terms such as urea, 
kidney, lungs and excretion. 
 Learners are provided with materials such as blu tack or clay to mould the kidney 
of humans. 
NB: The lesson should mainly focus on the kidneys, lungs, skin, and their excretory 
products. 
Core Competencies 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Creativity and Innovation 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Planning  
Observing Communicating 
 
Recording 
 Analysing 
Evaluating,  
 
SUB-STRAND 2: THE SOLAR SYSTEM 
 
B6.3.2.1 Show 
understanding of the 
motion of bodies in 
the solar system 
B6.3.2.1.1: Explain the difference between a star, a planet and a satellite 
 Show videos, models or pictures of the solar system and engage learners to 
identify the planets in the system.  
 Draw the solar system on the board, using different colours to illustrate the 
different bodies. 
 Learners tell what they see when they view the sky during the night and during 
day time? 
 Based on their answers, use the chart to explain that a star is a heavenly body that 
produces its own light and is stationary (does not move).  
 Using the solar system as an example, guide learners to understand that a planet is 
a body that moves around a star (e.g. the earth and the other planets move 
around the sun). 
 Similarly, explain to learners that a satellite is a smaller body that moves around a 
bigger one, e.g. the moon is a satellite of the earth. 
 Engage learners in a game that mimics the solar system (e.g. place a chair at the 
centre of the football field with one learner to represent the sun. Now ask 8 
learners to go around the chair in circles to represent the planets). 
Core Competencies 
Digital Literacy 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Observing 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
Generalising 
 
 
 

 
39 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
 
SUB-STRAND 3: ECOSYSTEM 
B6.3.3.1 Show 
understanding of 
ecosystems, 
interdependency of 
organisms in an 
ecosystem and 
appreciate the 
interactions 
B6.3.3.1.1 Investigate various interactions in an ecosystem and the effect on 
humans 
 Show learners pictures of different ecosystems. 
 Learners observe different ecosystems in the field such as a small bush or pond. 
 Engage learners to brainstorm to come out with possible interactions that occur in 
the given ecosystem. 
 Learners work in groups to draw or design different ecosystems in the classroom. 
 Learners observe each of the ecosystems and identify some possible interactions 
that can take place within each ecosystem they have designed.  
 Guide learners to discuss the effects of interactions (hunting, farming and predation) 
on humans and other living things within a given ecosystem. 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Designing  
Planning 
Observing 
Analysing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
40 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 4: FORCES AND ENERGY  
SUB-STRAND 1: SOURCES AND FORMS OF ENERGY 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND 
CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.1.1 
Demonstrate 
understanding of 
the concept of 
energy, its 
various forms 
and sources and 
the ways in 
which it can be 
transformed and 
conserved 
B6.4.1.1.1 Compare renewable and non-renewable sources of energy 
 
 Begin by asking the following questions: (1) what is energy? (2) Where does energy come 
from? (answers to this question may include the sun, batteries, food, firewood and 
hydroelectric power and thermal plants) 
 Show pictures and videos of different sources of energy such as the sun, batteries, food and 
water. 
 Learners work in groups to identify sources of energy and sort them into sources that are 
not depleted when used (solar, wind and hydro sources) and those that are depleted after 
use (firewood, batteries, food, gasoline, diesel, kerosene, etc.).  
 Learners present their responses on flashcards for a general discussion in class. 
 Assist learners to build their vocabulary by introducing and explaining the terms, “renewable” 
and “non-renewable” sources of energy and give examples of such sources. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and 
Problem-Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific 
Practices 
Planning 
Observing 
Analysing 
Synthesising 
Generating 
B6.4.1.2 Show 
understanding of 
the concept of 
heat energy in 
terms of its 
importance, 
effects, sources 
and transfer 
from one 
medium to 
another 
 
 
B6.4.1.2.1 Measure the temperature of a body using a thermometer  
 Assist learners to reflect on their previous knowledge on heat and temperature (temperature 
refers to the degree of hotness of a body).  
 Provide clinical and laboratory thermometers or show pictures of different types of 
thermometers.  
 Learners identify the equipment and where and when it is used.  
 Guide learners, in groups, to produce their own improvised thermometers using plastic 
bottles, plastic straws, dyes and water. 
 Some learners share experiences of how their body temperatures were measured on a visit 
to a health centre.  
 Learners demonstrate the use of thermometers to measure temperature of their bodies and 
that of warm water 
 
NB: Let learners be aware of the precautions in using the clinical and laboratory thermometers.  
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and 
Problem-Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Personal development and 
leadership 
 
Subject Specific 
Practices 
Planning 
Observing 
Recording 
Measuring 
Generating 
 
 
 

 
41 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 2: ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.4.2.1 
Demonstrate 
knowledge of 
generation of 
electricity, its 
transmission and 
transformation 
into other forms 
B6.4.2.1.1 Construct an electric circuit and know the functions of its        
components 
 Engage learners to discuss the basic components of an electric circuit (use video 
demonstrations where available). 
 Note that the basic components are the battery (dry cell), bulb, connecting wire, 
switch/key, etc. 
 Learners mention the roles of the components of the electric circuit. 
 Learners, in groups, provide them with the electrical components and assist them to 
construct a functional simple electric circuit. 
 Learners draw the circuits they have constructed. 
 
B6.4.2.1.2 Identify the symbols used in representing various components in a given 
 circuit diagram 
 Identify and match basic components of an electric circuit with their symbols. 
 Learners, in groups, draw simple circuit diagrams using symbols of the components 
(switch, connecting wires, battery, electrical bulb).  
  
B6.4.2.1.3 Know conductors, semi-conductors and insulators  
 Gather items such as bulbs, battery, electric wires. 
 Brainstorm with learners on the meaning of the terms “conductors”, “semi-conductors” 
and “insulators” with examples.  
 Learners are provided the following materials (spoons, foils, drinking straw, plastic 
materials, piece of wood, glass rod, leather, nails, keys, pencils, pens, LEDs, diodes, etc.) 
for an activity.   
 Connect a simple electrical circuit (an open circuit) using a bulb, battery and connecting 
wire.  
 Learners use the open circuit to classify the materials provided as conductors, semi-
conductors and insulators.  
 Learners explain why the electrical wires in their homes are coated with plastics 
 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Planning 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Generating 
 
 
 
 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Planning 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Communicating 
Generating 
 

 
42 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6. 4.2.2 Know 
the functions and 
assemblage of 
basic electronic 
components 
 
 
 
B6.4.2.2.1 Construct an electronic circuit using battery, connecting wire and LED 
 Put learners into mixed ability groups for this activity.  
 Provide learners with connecting wires, LED and battery. 
 Learners, in their groups, connect a series circuit comprising an LED, 3V battery, a 
switch, to light the LED.  
 Learners discuss what they did to light the LED.  
 Learners are tasked to draw the electronic circuit and label the parts. 
 
NB: Build a stock of electronic components from discarded electronic gadgets such as radio 
and TV sets, phone chargers and flashlights. 
 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Personal development and 
leadership 
Subject Specific Practices 
Planning, Observing 
Manipulating 
Evaluating 
Communicating 
Generating 
 
 
SUB STRAND 3: FORCES AND MOVEMENT 
 
B6.4.3.1 Know 
that movement is 
caused by applied 
forces due to the 
release of stored 
energy 
 
B6.4.3.1.1 Recognise the relationship between energy and forces  
 Learners form different groups to undertake activities on application of forces, e.g. 
pulling items across a distance, lifting up loads of different weights.  
 Learners brainstorm on the relationship between energy and forces, e.g. why is it more 
difficult to lift a table than a book? 
 Lead learners to explain that when a force acts on an object, it first needs to overcome 
the weight of the object before it can make the object move in the direction of the 
force. Thus, it is easier to pull a lighter object than a heavier one. 
 Relate this to the need to apply more energy/effort in our daily activities to be 
successful (Weeding with a cutlass, cutting a tree etc.).  
 
NB: The greater the force exerted on a body/machine, the greater the work done. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Creativity and innovation 
 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
 
Planning, Observing 
Manipulating, Communicating, 
Generating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
43 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B4.4.3.2 
Recognise some 
simple machines 
used for making 
work easier, 
analyse their 
advantages and 
know their uses 
 
B6.4.3.2.1 Identify levers, pulleys, inclined planes as classes of simple machines and 
cite some common examples 
 Lead learners to visit various workplaces where levers, pulleys or inclined planes are 
used in their work or show pictures of different classes of simple machines. 
 Learners talk about their experiences on the visit. 
 Learners are shown examples of simple machines (screw drivers, pliers, scissors, wheel 
barrow, shovel, hammer, spanners, axe, rake, cutlass, hoe, mattock, crowbar, claw 
hammer, screws, wooden board, to identify and classify them as levers, pulleys or 
inclined planes). 
 Learners demonstrate proper ways of using simple machines. 
 
Project: Design and Make Simple Machines 
Learners design and make simple machine of their choice from suitable materials such as 
bamboo, wood, cardboard, plastics, paper and straws. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership 
Communication and 
Collaboration 
Creativity and innovation 
 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
 
Planning, Observing 
Manipulating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
44 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
STRAND 5: HUMANS AND THE ENVIRONMENT  
SUB-STRAND 1: PERSONAL HYGIENE AND SANITATION 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.1.1 
Recognise the 
importance of 
personal hygiene 
B6.5.1.1.1 Identify the causes and effects of foul body odour on humans and how it 
can be prevented 
 Learners, in groups, discuss the causes of body odour. 
 Prepare personal hygiene cards/posters for each learner in the group to write one 
cause of foul body odour and how it can be prevented. 
 Learners pair-share their ideas and present to the whole class.  
 Present real items or materials that can be used to prevent foul body (lime, lemon, 
deodorant, etc.) odour to learners in class and demonstrate their correct use.  
 Evaluate learners by letting them plan and design a project on how to eliminate foul 
body odour. 
 
NB: Activities should include the use of lime and lemon for cleaning the armpit, regular 
bathing and cutting of hair and nails). 
 
B6.5.1.1.2 Describe ways of minimising waste 
 Learners watch pictures and videos showing and describing ways of minimising waste in 
the environment. 
 In groups, learners discuss and come out with ideas to minimise waste in their 
classroom, school environment, homes and their communities. 
 Each group discusses measures of minimising waste in the classroom, school 
environment, home, market, at the bus station, hospitals, church, mosque, beach, etc. 
 Learners present their ideas to the whole class. 
 Evaluate learners by assisting each group design a poster. 
 
Project; Designing litterbins 
Learners plan, design and make their own litterbins for use in the class and school               
community. 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and 
communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
 
 
Subject Specific Practices 
 
Designing Experiment 
Planning 
Observing 
Manipulating 
Evaluating 
Communicating 
Generating 
 
 

 
45 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
SUB-STRAND 2: DISEASES 
 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.2.1 
Demonstrate 
knowledge of 
common diseases of 
humans; causes, 
symptoms, effects 
and prevention 
B6.5.2.1.1 Explain the causes, symptoms and prevention of Eczema 
 Learners watch pictures of people suffering from eczema. 
 In groups, learners come out with the possible causes, symptoms and prevention. 
 Allow group presentations and write learners’ ideas on the board. 
 Invite health personnel to give a talk on eczema and other common skin diseases. 
 
B6.5.2.1.2 Know how to prevent meningitis 
 Learners watch videos or pictures on the causes and prevention of meningitis.  
 Gather relevant charts on meningitis from a health centre and engage learners in a 
presentation on how to prevent it.  
 Invite a health personnel or the SHEP coordinator to give a presentation on 
meningitis  
 
Core Competencies 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and 
communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
Digital literacy 
Subject Specific Practices 
 
Observing 
Communicating 
Generating 
 
 SUB-STRAND 3: SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY 
 
 
B6.5.3.1 Recognise 
the impact of 
science and 
technology on 
society 
5.3.1.1 Identify the scientific concepts and principles underlying the 
operation of some industries  
 Learners watch a video of kenkey and salt production processes. 
 Learners go on a study visit to a local business venture such as kenkey, soap, salt 
production, cooking oil, or gari production centre. 
 Learners must observe the activities and interact with people at the workplace. 
 Engage learners, in groups, to discuss and identify the key scientific principles 
underlying the operations of the industries visited. 
 Build vocabulary of learners by explaining key terms such as evaporation, salting-out, 
fermentation and saponification.  
 
Project 
Give learners a project to work in groups to produce yoghurt, kenkey or soap based on the 
experiences from their study visits. 
Core Competencies 
Digital literacy 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Cultural identity and global 
citizenship 
Collaboration and 
communication 
Subject Specific Practices 
Designing Experiment 
Planning 
Observing 
Generating 
 

 
46 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
SUB-STRAND 4: CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
CONTENT 
STANDARDS 
 
 
INDICATORS AND EXEMPLARS 
SUBJECT SPECIFIC 
PRACTICES AND CORE 
COMPETENCIES 
B6.5.4.1 Know that 
climate change is 
one of the most 
important 
environmental 
issues facing the 
world today. 
B6.5.4.1.1   Know the effects of climate change on humans 
 Learners are assigned to find out from their parents or elderly people what the 
weather situation has been since 2000. 
 Learners share their information with the whole class. 
 Show pictures and videos displaying activities that contribute to climate change and 
the associated effects on the earth. 
 Stress the effects of climate change on weather conditions such as drought, 
flooding, increase in temperature, etc. 
 Learners are engaged in a think-pair-share activity to come out with ways of 
controlling the causes of climate change. 
 Guide learners to design a concept map on climate change, showing its causes, 
effects and prevention. 
 Build the vocabulary of learners by explaining terms such as climate change, 
drought, flooding and temperature.  
 Engage learners in an awareness campaign on climate change issues in the school 
and nearby community, using placards, posters and banners. 
 Learners work in groups to plant and nurture trees at vantage points in the school 
environment. 
 Learners predict what will happen if there are no trees in the world. 
Core Competencies 
Digital literacy 
Critical thinking and Problem-
Solving 
Collaboration and 
communication. 
Personal Development and 
Leadership  
 
Subject Specific Practices 
Designing Experiment 
Planning 
Observing 
Communicating 
Generating 
Analysing 
Evaluating 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
47 
© NaCCA, Ministry of Education 2019 
 
 
 
SCIENCE SUBJECT PANEL MEMBERS AND REVIEWERS   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NAME INSTITUTION 
Writing  panels 
 
Prof Anthony Krueger  Department of Science Education, UCC 
Prof Leonard Amekudzi Dept of Physics, KNUST 
Mr Antwi-Aning NaCCA-NEAU 
Mercy Nyamekye NaCCA 
Olivia Opare Science Education Unit, GES 
Saddik A. Mohammed  Ga South Municipal Education Office 
Cosmos Eminah NaCCA 
Expert Reviewers 
 
Prof. John K. Eminah UEW 
Dr. Fiifi Mensah UCC 
Curriculum Adviser 
 
Dr. Sam K.  Awuku  
Supervisor 
 
Felicia Boakye-Yiadom (Mrs) NaCCA, Outgoing Acting Executive Secretary   
Dr. Prince H. Armah NaCCA, Incoming Acting Executive Secretary   